TEIE  JOURNAL OF FINANCE  VOL.  LV.  NO.  4  AUGUST 2000 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis: 
Computational Algorithms, Statistical 
Inference, and Empirical Implementation 

ANDREW  W.  LO, HARRY  MAMAYSKY, AND  JIANG WANG* 

ABSTRACT 

Technical  analysis, also known as "charting," has been  a part of financial practice 
for many decades,  but  this discipline  has not received  the same level  of  academic 
scrutiny and acceptance as more traditional approaches such as fundamental analy-
sis. One of  the main  obstacles  is  the highly  subjective  nature  of  technical  analy-
sis-the  presence  of  geometric shapes in historical price charts is often in the eyes 
of  the beholder.  In this paper, we propose  a  systematic and automatic approach to 
technical  pattern recognition using nonparametric kernel regression, and we apply 
this  method  to  a  large  number  of  U.S. stocks  from  1962 to  1996 to  evaluate the 
effectiveness of  technical analysis. By  comparing  the unconditional empirical dis-
tribution  of daily stock returns to the conditional distribution-conditioned  on spe-
cific technical indicators  such as head-and-shoulders  or  double-bottoms-we 
find 
that over the 31-year sample period,  several technical indicators do provide  incre-
mental  information  and may have  some practical value. 

ONEOF  THE  GREATEST  GULFS  between  academic  finance and industry practice 
is the separation that exists between technical  analysts and their  academic 
critics. In contrast  to fundamental analysis, which was  quick to be  adopted 
by  the scholars of  modern quantitative finance, technical  analysis has been 
an orphan from  the very  start. It  has  been  argued  that  the  difference  be-
tween  fundamental analysis and technical  analysis is not  unlike the differ-
ence between astronomy and astrology.Among some circles, technical analysis 
is known  as "voodoo finance." And  in his  influential book A Random  Walk 
down  Wall Street, Burton Malkiel  (1996) concludes that "[ulnder  scientific 
scrutiny, chart-reading must  share a  pedestal with  alchemy." 

However, several academic studies suggest that despite its jargon  and meth-
ods, technical  analysis may well be  an effective means for extracting useful 
information from market prices. For example, in rejecting the Random Walk 

" MIT Sloan  School of  Management  and Yale  School of  Management.  Corresponding  author: 
Andrew W.  Lo  (alo@mit.edu).This research was partially supported by  the MIT Laboratory for 
Financial  Engineering,  Merrill  Lynch,  and  the  National  Science  Foundation  (Grant  SBR-
9709976). We  thank Ralph  Acampora,  Franklin Allen,  Susan Berger,  Mike  Epstein,  Narasim-
han Jegadeesh,  Ed Kao, Doug Sanzone, Jeff Simonoff, Tom  Stoker, and seminar participants  a t  
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  NYU,  and  conference  participants  a t  the  Columbia-
JAFEE conference, the  1999 Joint Statistical Meetings,  RISK 99, the  1999 Annual Meeting  of 
the Society  for  Computational  Economics,  and the 2000 Annual  Meeting  of  the American  Fi-
nance Association for valuable  comments  and discussion. 

1706 

The Journal of  Finance 

Hypothesis  for  weekly  U.S.  stock  indexes,  Lo  and  MacKinlay  (1988,  1999) 
have  shown that past prices  may be used to forecast future returns to some 
degree, a fact that all technical  analysts take for granted. Studies by Tabell 
and Tabell (1964), Treynor and Ferguson (1985), Brown and Jennings (1989), 
Jegadeesh  and  Titman  (1993), Blume,  Easley,  and  O'Hara  (1994), Chan, 
Jegadeesh,  and  Lakonishok  (1996), Lo  and  MacKinlay  (1997), Grundy  and 
Martin  (1998), and Rouwenhorst  (1998) have also provided indirect support 
for technical analysis, and more direct support has been given by Pruitt and 
White  (1988), Neftci  (1991), Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron  (1992), Neely, 
Weller, and Dittmar (1997), Neely and Weller (1998), Chang and Osler (1994), 
Osler and Chang (1995), and Allen  and Karjalainen  (1999). 

One explanation for this  state of  controversy  and confusion is the unique 
and sometimes impenetrable jargon  used by technical analysts, some of which 
has developed into a standard lexicon that can be  translated.  But there are 
many  "homegrown" variations,  each  with  its  own  patois,  which  can  often 
frustrate  the uninitiated. Campbell, Lo,  and  MacKinlay  (1997, 43-44)  pro-
vide a striking example of  the linguistic barriers between technical analysts 
and academic finance by  contrasting this  statement: 

The presence of  clearly identified  support and resistance levels, coupled 
with  a one-third retracement  parameter when  prices  lie between them, 
suggests the presence of  strong buying  and selling opportunities in the 
near-term. 

with  this  one: 

The magnitudes  and  decay pattern  of  the first twelve  autocorrelations 
and the statistical significance of  the Box-Pierce Q-statistic suggest the 
presence  of  a high-frequency predictable  component  in stock returns. 

Despite  the  fact  that  both  statements  have  the  same  meaning-that 
prices  contain information  for predicting future returns-most 
one statement plausible  and the other  puzzling  or, worse,  offensive. 

past 
readers find 

These linguistic barriers underscore an important difference between tech- 
nical  analysis  and  quantitative  finance: technical  analysis  is  primarily  vi-
sual, whereas  quantitative  finance  is  primarily  algebraic  and  numerical. 
Therefore, technical analysis employs the tools of  geometry and pattern rec- 
ognition, and quantitative finance employs the tools of  mathematical  analy- 
sis  and  probability  and  statistics.  In  the wake  of  recent  breakthroughs  in 
financial engineering, computer technology, and numerical algorithms, it is 
no  wonder  that  quantitative  finance  has  overtaken  technical  analysis  in 
popularity-the 
principles  of  portfolio  optimization  are  far  easier  to  pro- 
gram into a computer than the basic tenets of  technical analysis. Neverthe- 
less, technical analysis has survived through the years, perhaps  because its 
visual mode of  analysis is more conducive to human cognition, and because 
pattern recognition is one of  the few repetitive activities  for which comput- 
ers do  not  have  an absolute advantage  (yet). 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

Pricc 

I 


Pricc 

Date 

Date 

Figure  1.  Two hypothetical  price/volume charts. 

Indeed, it is difficult to dispute the potential value of  price/volume charts 
when  confronted  with  the visual  evidence.  For  example, compare  the  two 
hypothetical  price  charts  given  in  Figure  1. Despite  the  fact  that  the  two 
price  series  are identical over  the first  half  of  the  sample, the volume  pat- 
terns differ, and this seems to be informative. In particular, the lower chart, 
which shows high volume accompanying a positive price trend, suggests that 
there  may  be  more  information  content  in  the  trend,  e.g., broader  partici- 
pation  among  investors.  The  fact  that  the joint  distribution of  prices  and 
volume  contains important information is hardly  controversial  among aca- 
demics. Why, then, is the value of  a visual depiction of  that joint  distribution 
so hotly  contested? 

1708 

The Journal of  Finance 

In  this paper, we hope to bridge  this gulf  between  technical  analysis and 
quantitative finance by  developing  a  systematic and  scientific  approach to 
the practice of  technical analysis and by employing the now-standard meth- 
ods  of  empirical  analysis  to  gauge  the efficacy of  technical  indicators  over 
time  and  across  securities.  In  doing  so,  our  goal  is  not  only  to  develop  a 
lingua franca with which disciples  of  both  disciplines can  engage in produc- 
tive  dialogue but  also to extend the reach of  technical  analysis by  augment- 
ing its tool  kit  with  some modern techniques  in  pattern recognition. 

The general goal of technical analysis is to identify regularities in the time 
series of prices by extracting nonlinear patterns from noisy data. Implicit in 
this goal is the recognition that some price movements  are significant-they 
contribute to the formation of a specific pattern-and  others are merely ran- 
dom fluctuations to be ignored. In many cases, the human eye can perform this 
"signal extraction" quickly and accurately, and until recently, computer algo- 
rithms could not. However, a class of  statistical estimators, called smoothing 
esttnzators, is ideally suited to this task because they extract nonlinear rela- 
tions m ( . )by "averaging out" the noise. Therefore, we propose using these es- 
timators to mimic and, in some cases, sharpen the skills of a trained technical 
analyst in identifying certain patterns in historical price series. 

In  Section  I, we  provide  a  brief  review  of  smoothing  estimators  and  de- 
scribe  in  detail  the  specific  smoothing  estimator  we  use  in  our  analysis: 
kernel  regression.  Our  algorithm  for  automating technical  analysis  is  de- 
scribed in Section II. We  apply this algorithm to the daily returns of  several 
hundred U.S. stocks from 1962 to  1996 and report the results in Section 111. 
To  check the accuracy of our statistical inferences, we perform  several Monte 
Carlo  simulation  experiments  and  the  results  are given  in  Section  IV.  We 
conclude in  Section V. 

I.  Smoothing Estimators and Kernel Regression 

The starting point for any study of technical analysis is the recognition that 
prices evolve in a nonlinear fashion over time and that the nonlinearities con- 
tain certain regularities or patterns. To  capture such regularities quantita- 
tively, we begin by asserting that prices {P,} satisfy the following expression: 

where m(X,) is an arbitrary fixed but unknown nonlinear function of a state 
variable X,  and { E , )   is white  noise. 

For the purposes of pattern recognition in which our goal is to construct a 
smooth  function  m ( . ) to  approximate the time  series  of  prices  {p,),we  set 
the state variable equal to time, X ,   = t. However, to keep  our notation con- 
sistent with that of  the kernel regression  literature, we will continue to use 
X ,  in our  exposition. 

When  prices  are expressed  as equation  (I), it is  apparent that geometric 

patterns  can  emerge  from  a  visual  inspection  of  historical  price  series- 
prices  are  the  sum  of  the  nonlinear  pattern  m(X,)  and  white  noise-and 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

1709 

that such patterns may provide useful information about the unknown func- 
tion  m(.) to be  estimated. But just  how  useful  is  this information? 

To  answer this question  empirically and systematically, we  must first de- 
velop a method for automating the identification of technical indicators; that 
is, we  require  a  pattern-recognition  algorithm.  Once  such  an  algorithm  is 
developed, it can be  applied  to a large number of  securities over many time 
periods  to  determine the efficacy of  various technical  indicators. Moreover, 
quantitative  comparisons  of  the  performance  of  several  indicators  can  be 
conducted,  and  the  statistical  significance  of  such  performance  can  be  as- 
sessed through  Monte  Carlo  simulation and bootstrap techniques.1 

In Section I.A, we provide a briefreview of a general class ofpattern-recognition 
techniques known as smoothing estimators, and in Section 1.B we describe in 
some detail a particular method called nonparametric kernel regression on which 
our algorithm is based. Kernel regression estimators are calibrated by a band- 
width parameter, and we discuss how the bandwidth is selected in Section I.C. 

A.  Smoothing Estimators 

One of  the most  common methods for estimating nonlinear relations such 
as equation  (1)is  smoothing, in which  observational  errors  are reduced  by 
averaging the data in sophisticated ways.  Kernel regression, orthogonal se- 
ries  expansion, projection  pursuit, nearest-neighbor estimators, average de- 
rivative estimators, splines, and neural networks are all examples of smoothing 
estimators.  In  addition  to  possessing  certain  statistical  optimality  proper- 
ties,  smoothing estimators  are  motivated  by  their  close  correspondence  to 
the way human cognition  extracts  regularities  from noisy data.2 Therefore, 
they  are ideal  for our purposes. 

To  provide  some intuition  for  how  averaging  can  recover  nonlinear  rela- 
tions such as the function m(.) in equation (I), suppose we wish to estimate 
m ( . )  at a  particular  date to when Xto = xo. Now  suppose  that  for  this  one 
observation, Xto, we  can  obtain  repeated  independent  observations  of  the 
price Go,say P,:  = p,, ...,Pi:  = p,  (note that  these  are n  independent  real- 
izations of  the price  at the same date to, clearly an impossibility in practice, 
but  let  us  continue  this  thought  experiment  for  a  few  more  steps). Then  a 
natural  estimator  of  the function m ( . )  at the point  xo is 

'A  similar  approach  has  been  proposed  by  Chang and  Osler  (1994) and  Osler  and  Chang 
(1995) for  the  case  of  foreign-currency trading  rules  based  on  a  head-and-shoulders  pattern. 
They develop  an algorithm for  automatically detecting geometric patterns  in price or exchange 
data by  looking  a t  properly  defined  local  extrema. 

See, for  example, Beymer and Poggio  (1996), Poggio and Beymer (1996), and Riesenhuber 

and Poggio  (1997). 

1710 

The Journal  of  Finance 

and by  the Law of  Large Numbers,  the second term in equation  (3) becomes 
negligible  for  large n .  

Of  course, if  {P,} is  a  time  series, we  do  not  have  the luxury of  repeated 
observations for a given X,.  However, if we  assume that the function m(.) is 
sufficiently  smooth, then for time-series observations Xt near the value x,, 
the  corresponding values  of  Pt  should  be  close  to  m(x,).  In  other  words,  if 
m ( . )  is sufficiently  smooth, then in a small neighborhood  around x,,  m(x,) 
will be nearly constant and may be estimated by taking an average of the P,s 
that correspond  to those X, s near x,.  The closer the X, s are to the value x,, 
the closer an average of  corresponding 4 s  will be  to m(x,).  This  argues for 
a  weighted  average  of  the  Pts, where  the  weights  decline  as  the X,s  get 
farther away from x,.  This weighted-average or  "local averaging" procedure 
of  estimating m(x) is the essence of  smoothing. 

More formally, for any arbitrary x, a smoothing estimator  of  m ( x )may be 

expressed  as 

where the weights {w,(x)} are large for those 6 s  paired with X,s  near x, and 
small for those P,s  with X,s  far from x. To  implement  such a procedure, we 
must  define  what  we  mean  by  "near" and  "far." If  we  choose  too  large  a 
neighborhood around x to compute the average, the weighted average will be 
too  smooth  and  will  not  exhibit  the  genuine  nonlinearities  of  m(.). If  we 
choose too  small a neighborhood  around x, the weighted  average will be  too 
variable,  reflecting  noise  as well  as  the variations  in  m(.). Therefore,  the 
weights {w,(x)} must be chosen carefully to balance these two considerations. 

B.  Kernel  Regression 

For  the  kernel  regression  estimator,  the  weight  function  w,(x)  is  con-

structed from  a probability  density function K(x), also  called  a hernel:3 

By rescaling the kernel with respect to a parameter h  > 0, we can change its 
spread; that is, let 

Despite  the fact that K(x) is a probability  density function, it plays no probabilistic  role  in 
is  merely  a  convenient  method  for  computing  a weighted  average 
the subsequent  analysis-it 
and  does  not  imply,  for  example, that  X is  distributed  according  to  K(x) (which would  be  a 
parametric  assumption). 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

1711 

and define the weight function to be used in the weighted average (equation 
(4)) as 

If h  is very small, the averaging will be  done with respect  to a rather small 
neighborhood around each of the Xts. If h is very large, the averaging will be 
over  larger  neighborhoods  of  the X,s.  Therefore,  controlling  the  degree  of 
averaging amounts to  adjusting the smoothing parameter  h ,  also known  as 
the bandwidth. Choosing the appropriate bandwidth is an important aspect 
of  any local-averaging technique  and is discussed more fully in Section 1I.C. 
Substituting equation  (8) into  equation  (4) yields  the Nadaraya-Watson 

kernel  estimator  mh(x) of  m(x): 

Under  certain  regularity  conditions  on  the  shape  of  the  kernel  K  and  the 
magnitudes and behavior of the weights as the sample size grows, it may be 
shown  that  mh(x) converges  to  m(x) asymptotically  in  several  ways  (see 
Hardle  (1990) for  further  details). This  convergence  property  holds  for  a 
wide  class  of  kernels, but  for the remainder  of  this  paper  we  shall use  the 
most  popular  choice of  kernel, the Gaussian kernel: 

C.  Selecting  the Bandwidth 

Selecting the appropriate bandwidth h  in equation  (9) is clearly central to 
the  success  of  m,(.)  in  approximating m(.)-too 
little  averaging  yields  a 
function that is too choppy, and too much averaging yields a function that is 
too smooth. To  illustrate these two extremes, Figure 2 displays the Nadaraya- 
Watson kernel estimator applied to 500 data points generated from the relation: 

where X,  is evenly  spaced  in the interval [ 0 , 2 ~ ] .  Panel  2  (a) plots  the raw 
data  and  the function to be  approximated. 

1712 

The Journal  of  Finance 

S i m u l a t e d   Data:  Y  =  Sin(X)  +  .5Z 

db 

a 

a A  

a 


Kernel  E s t i m a t e   f o r   Y  =- Sin(X)+.5Z,  h z . 1 0  

Figure 2. Illustration of bandwidth selection for kernel regression. 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

1713 

K e r n e l   E s t i m a t e   f o r   Y  =  Sin(X)+.5Z,  h=.3o 

K e r n e l   E s t i m a t e   f o r   Y  =  Sin(X)+.5Z,  h=2.0o 

I  0.00 

1.57 

3.14 

X 
(4 

Figure 2. Continued 

4.71 

6.28 

1714 

The Journal of  Finance 

Kernel estimators for three different bandwidths are plotted as solid lines in 
Panels 2(b)-(c). The bandwidth in 2(b) is clearly too small; the function is too 
variable, fitting the "noise" 0.562, and also the "signal" Sin(.). Increasing the 
bandwidth slightly yields a much  more accurate approximation  to Sin(.) as 
Panel 2(c) illustrates. However, Panel 2(d) shows that if the bandwidth is in- 
creased beyond some point, there is too much averaging and information is lost. 
There  are  several  methods  for  automating  the  choice  of  bandwidth  h  in 
equation (9),but the most popular is the cross-validation method  in which h 
is  chosen  to  minimize  the cross-validation function 

1 
CV(h) = -
T  , = I  

(P, - mh,t)2, 

where 

The  estimator  mh,, is  the kernel  regression  estimator  applied  to  the  price 
history  {P,)  with  the  tth  observation  omitted, and  the summands in  equa- 
tion  (12) are the squared  errors  of  the m,, ,s, each evaluated at the omitted 
observation. For  a given bandwidth parameter  h, the cross-validation func- 
tion  is a measure of  the ability of  the kernel regression  estimator to fit each 
observation  P,  when  that  observation  is  not  used  to  construct  the  kernel 
estimator. By  selecting the bandwidth  that minimizes  this  function, we  ob- 
tain  a kernel estimator  that  satisfies certain  optimality  properties,  for  ex- 
ample, minimum  asymptotic mean-squared error.4 

Interestingly, the bandwidths obtained from minimizing the cross-validation 

function  are generally  too  large for  our  application  to  technical  analysis- 
when we presented  several professional technical analysts with plots of  cross- 
validation-fitted functions mI,(.), they all concluded that the fitted functions 
were too smooth. In other words, the cross-validation-determined bandwidth 
places  too  much weight  on prices  far away from any given time t ,  inducing 
too much averaging and discarding valuable information in local price move- 
ments.  Through  trial  and  error, and  by  polling  professional  technical  ana- 
lysts, we  have  found  that an acceptable solution to  this problem  is to use  a 
bandwidth of  0.3 x h", where h" minimizes  CV(h).S Admittedly, this is an ad 
hoc  approach, and it remains  an important challenge for future research to 
develop a more  rigorous  procedure. 

However, there  are other bandwidth-selection  methods that yield the same asymptotic op- 
timality  properties  but that have different  implications  for the finite-sample properties  of  ker- 
nel  estimators.  See Hardle  (1990) for  further discussion. 

%pecifically,  we  produced  fitted curves for various bandwidths  and compared their extrema 
to the original price  series visually to see if we were  fitting more "noise" than "signal," and we 
asked several professional technical analysts to do the same. Through this informal process, we 
settled  on  the bandwidth  of  0.3  X  h'  and used  it for  the remainder  of  our  analysis. This  pro- 
cedure was followed before we performed  the statistical analysis of Section 111, and we  made no 
revision to the choice of  bandwidth  afterward 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

1715 

Another promising  direction for future research is to consider alternatives 
to kernel  regression. Although  kernel  regression  is useful  for its simplicity 
and intuitive appeal, kernel estimators suffer from a number of  well-known 
deficiencies, for instance, boundary bias,  lack  of  local variability  in the de- 
gree  of  smoothing,  and  so  on. A popular  alternative  that  overcomes these 
particular  deficiencies is local polynomial  regression in which local averag- 
ing of  polynomials is performed  to obtain an estimator of  m ( ~ ) . ~Such alter- 
natives  may  yield  important  improvements  in  the  pattern-recognition 
algorithm described  in  Section  11. 

11.  Automating Technical Analysis 
Armed  with  a  mathematical  representation  m ( . )  of  (4) with which  geo- 
metric properties  can be  characterized in an objective manner, we  can now 
construct  an  algorithm  for  automating  the  detection  of  technical  patterns. 
Specifically, our algorithm contains  three steps: 

1. Define  each technical pattern in terms of  its geometric properties, for 

example, local extrema  (maxima and minima). 

2. 	 Construct  a  kernel  estimator m ( . )  of  a  given  time  series of  prices  so 

that its extrema  can be  determined numerically. 

3. 	Analyze  I % ( . )   for occurrences  of  each technical  pattern. 

The last two steps are rather straightforward  applications  of  kernel  regres- 
sion. The first  step is  likely  to be  the lnost  controversial because  it is here 
that  the  skills  and judgment  of  a  professional  technical  analyst  come  into 
play. Although  we  will  argue in  Section  1I.A that  most  technical  indicators 
can  be  characterized by  specific  sequences  of  local  extrema,  technical  ana- 
lysts may argue that these are poor approximations to the kinds of patterns 
that trained human analysts can identify. 

While pattern-recognition techniques  have been  successful in automating 

a number of  tasks previously  considered  to be  uniquely human endeavors- 
fingerprint identification, handwriting analysis, face recognition, and so on- 
nevertheless it is possible that no algorithm can completely capture the skills 
of  an  experienced  technical  analyst. We  acknowledge  that  any  automated 
procedure for pattern recognition  may miss some of the more subtle nuances 
that human cognition is capable of  discerning, but whether  an algorithm is 
a poor  approximation to human judgment  can only be  determined by  inves- 
tigating  the approximation  errors  empirically. As  long as an algorithm  can 
provide  a  reasonable  approximation  to  some  of  the  cognitive  abilities  of  a 
human  analyst, we  can use  such  an algorithm to  investigate the empirical 
performance of those aspects of  technical analysis for which the algorithm is 
a good approximation. Moreover, if technical analysis is an a r t  form that can 

'See  Simonoff  (1996) for  a  discussion  of  the problems  with kernel  estimators and alterna- 

tives  such  as local polynomial regression. 

1716 

The Journal of  Finance 

be taught, then surely its basic precepts can be quantified and automated to 
some  degree.  And  as  increasingly  sophisticated  pattern-recognition  tech- 
niques  are developed, a larger  fraction of  the a r t  will become  a  science. 

More  important,  from  a  practical  perspective,  there  may  be  significant 
benefits to developing an algorithmic approach to technical analysis because 
of  the leverage that technology  can provide. As  with  many  other  successful 
technologies,  the  automation  of  technical  pattern  recognition  may  not  re- 
place  the skills  of  a technical  analyst but  can  amplify  them  considerably. 

In  Section  II.A, we  propose  definitions  of  10 technical  patterns  based  on 
their  extrema.  In  Section  II.B, we  describe a  specific  algorithm  to  identify 
technical  patterns  based  on  the  local  extrema  of  price  series using  kernel 
regression  estimators, and we provide specific examples of  the algorithm at 
work  in Section  1I.C. 

A.  Definitions  of  Technical Patterns 

We focus on five pairs of technical patterns that are among the most popular 
patterns of traditional technical analysis (see, e.g., Edwards and Magee (1966, 
Chaps. VII-X)): head-and-shoulders (HS) and inverse head-and-shoulders (IHS), 
broadening tops (BTOP) and bottoms  (BBOT), triangle tops (TTOP) and bot- 
toms  (TBOT), rectangle tops  (RTOP) and bottoms  (RBOT), and double tops 
(DTOP) and bottoms  (DBOT). There are many other technical indicators that 
may be easier to detect algorithmically-moving  averages, support and resis- 
tance levels, and oscillators, for example-but  because we wish to illustrate 
the power of smoothing techniques in automating technical analysis, we focus 
on precisely those patterns that are most difficult  to quantify analytically. 

Consider  the  systematic component  m ( . )of  a  price history  {P,} and  sup- 
pose  we  have  identified  n  local  extrema,  that  is,  the  local  maxima  and 
minima, of  {P,). Denote by  E l ,  E,, . . . ,E,, the n  extrema  and  t;,  t;,  . . . ,t;  the 
dates on which these extrema occur. Then we  have the following definitions. 

Definition  1 (Head-and-Shoulders) Head-and-shoulders  (HS)  and  in- 
verted head-and-shoulders (IHS) patterns are characterized by a sequence of 
five consecutive local extrema E l , .  . . ,E 5  such that 

HS = 

IHS = 

(El is a maximum 


I 
E3 > El, E3 > E, 

I E3 < E l ,  E3 < E 5  

(El is a minimum 

E l  and E,  are within  1.5 percent of their average 

(E, and E 4  are within  1.5 percent of their average, 

El and E,  are within  1.5 percent of  their average 

(E, and E,  are within  1.5 percent of their average 

Foundations o f  Technical Analysis 

1717 

Observe that only five consecutive  extrema are required  to identify  a head- 
and-shoulders pattern. This follows from the formalization  of  the geometry 
of  a  head-and-shoulders pattern: three peaks, with the middle  peak  higher 
than  the  other  two.  Because  consecutive  extrema  must  alternate  between 
maxima  and  minima  for  smooth  functions?  the  three-peaks pattern  corre- 
sponds  to  a  sequence  of  five  local  extrema:  maximum,  minimum,  highest 
maximum, minimum, and maximum. The inverse head-and-shoulders is sim- 
ply  the  mirror  image  of  the  head-and-shoulders,  with  the  initial  local  ex- 
trema  a  minimum. 

Because broadening,  rectangle, and triangle patterns  can begin  on  either 
a local maximum or minimum, we allow for both  of  these possibilities in our 
definitions by  distinguishing between  broadening tops  and bottoms. 

Definition  2  (Broadening) Broadening tops  (BTOP) and bottoms  (BBOT) 
are characterized by  a  sequence of  five consecutive  local  extrema E l , .  . . ,E 5  
such that 

BTOP 

E l  < E 3  < E 5  

1E, is a maximum 

E2 > E4 

,  BBOT-

E l  > E 3  > E 5  

1E l  is a minimum 

E2  < E4 

. 

Definitions  for triangle  and rectangle patterns  follow naturally. 

Definition 3 (Diangle) Triangle tops (TTOP) and bottoms (TBOT) are char- 
acterized by a sequence of  five consecutive local extrema E l , .  . . ,E,  such that 

E l  is a maximum 

E l  > E3 > E5 

, 

E2  < E4 

E l  is a minimum 

T B O T e   E l  < E 3  < E 5  

.

1

E2 > E4 

Definition 4  (Rectangle)  Rectangle  tops  (RTOP) and bottoms  (RBOT) are 
characterized by a sequence of five consecutive local extrema E l , .  .. ,E5 such 
that 

( E l  is a maximum 

RTOP -I bottoms are within 0.75 percent of their average 

tops are within 0.75 percent of their average 

(lowest top > highest bottom, 

After  all, for two consecutive maxima to be  local maxima, there  must be  a local minimum 

in between  and vice versa for  two  consecutive minima. 

17 18 

The Journal  o f  Finance 

lE l  is a minimum 

tops are within 0.75 percent of their average 

RBOT -I  bottoms are within 0.75 percent of their average 

\lowest top > highest bottom. 

The  definition  for  double  tops  and bottoms  is  slightly more  involved.  Con- 
sider first the  double  top.  Starting a t  a  local  maximum  E l ,  we  locate  the 
highest  local  maximum E,  occurring after E l  in the set  of  all local  extrema 
in the sample. We require that the two tops, E, and E,,  be within 1.5 percent 
of  their  average. Finally,  following  Edwards  and  Magee  (19661, we  require 
that the two  tops  occur  a t  least  a  month, or  22  trading days, apart. There- 
fore, we  have  the following  definition. 

Definition  5 (Double  Top  and  Bottom)  Double  tops  (DTOP) and  bottoms 
(DBOT) are characterized  by  a n  initial local  extremum  E l   and  subsequent 
local  extrema E,  and El, such that 

and 

( E l  is a maximum 

DTOP =  E l  and E,  are within  1.5 percent of their average 

1 

( E l  is a minimum 

DBOT = I  E l  and E b  are within  1.5 percent of their average 

B.  The Identification Algorithm 

Our algorithm begins  with a  sample of  prices {PI, . . . ,P,)  for which we fit 
kernel regressions, one for each subsample or window from t to t + 1 + d  - 1, 
where  t  varies from  1to T  - 1  - d  + 1, and 1  and d  are fixed  parameters 
whose purpose  is explained below. In the empirical  analysis of  Section 111, 
we set 1  = 35 and d  = 3; hence each window consists of  38 trading days. 

The motivation  for fitting kernel regressions to rolling windows  of  data is 
to  narrow  our  focus  to  patterns  that  are completed  within  the  span of  the 
window-1  + d trading days in our case. If we  fit a single kernel regression 
to the  entire dataset, many patterns  of  various  durations may emerge, and 
without imposing some additional structure on the nature of the patterns, it 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

1719 

is virtually impossible  to  distinguish  signal from noise  in this  case. There- 
fore, our  algorithm fixes  the length  of  the window  at 1  + d ,  but  kernel re- 
gressions are estimated on a rolling basis and we search for patterns in each 
window. 

Of  course, for any fixed  window, we  can only find patterns that are com- 
pleted within  I  + d  trading days. Without  further structure on  the system- 
atic component of prices m ( . ) ,this is a restriction that any empirical analysis 
must  contend  with.8 We  choose  a  shorter  window  length  of  I  = 35  trading 
days to focus on short-horizon patterns that may be more relevant for active 
equity traders, and we  leave  the  analysis  of  longer-horizon patterns  to  fu- 
ture research. 

The parameter d  controls for the fact that in practice we do not  observe a 
realization  of  a  given pattern  as  soon  as it has  completed.  Instead, we  as- 
sume that there may be  a lag between the pattern completion and the time 
of  pattern detection. To  account for this lag, we require that the final extre- 
mum that completes a pattern occurs on day t + 1  - 1; hence d is the number 
of  days following the completion of  a pattern that must pass before the pat- 
tern  is  detected.  This  will  become  more  important  in  Section  I11 when  we 
compute conditional  returns, conditioned  on  the realization  of  each pattern. 
In particular, we compute postpattern returns starting from the end of trad- 
ing  day  t  + 1  + d ,  that  is,  one  day  after  the  pattern  has  completed.  For 
example, if  we  determine  that  a  head-and-shoulder pattern  has  completed 
on day t + 1  - 1(having used prices from time t through time t + I  + d  - l ) ,  
we  compute  the  conditional  one-day  gross  return  as Z1 = Yt+l,.d+l/Yt+l+d 
Hence we  do  not  use  any forward  information  in computing returns  condi- 
tional on pattern completion. In other words,  the lag d  ensures that we  are 
computing our conditional returns completely out-of-sample and without any 
"look-ahead" bias. 

Within  each window, we  estimate a kernel  regression  using the prices  in 

that window, hence: 

where Kh(z) is given in equation (10) and h is the bandwidth parameter (see 
Sec. 1I.C). It is  clear  that mh(7) is a  differentiable  function of  T. 

Once the function mh(7) has been computed, its local extrema can be readily 
identified by finding times .r such that ~ g n ( h ) , ( . r ) )  = -sgn(m;,(.r  + I)), where 
m), denotes the derivative  of  mh with respect  to  T  and Sgn(.) is the signum 
function. If the signs of m;,(r) and m ; , ( ~  + 1)are + 1and - 1, respectively, then 

If  we  are willing  to  place  additional  restrictions  on  m ( . ) ,for  example,  linearity,  we  can 
obtain considerably more accurate inferences even for partially completed patterns in any fixed 
window. 

1720 

The Journal of  Finance 

we have found a local maximum, and if they are - 1and + 1, respectively, then 
we have found a local minimum. Once such a time .r has been identified, we 
proceed to identify a maximum or minimum in the original price series {P,} in 
the range [t - 1, t + 11, and the extrema in the original price series are used 
to determine whether or not a pattern has occurred  according to the defini- 
tions of  Section 1I.A. 

If mi, (7) = 0 for a given .r, which occurs if closing prices  stay the same for 
several consecutive days, we need to check whether the price we have found 
is a local minimum or maximum. We  look for the date s such that s = inf{s > 
7 : mjZ;,(s) f 0). We  then  apply the  same method  as discussed  above,  except 
here we  compare  s g n ( m ~ ( . r  - 1))and  sgn(m;, (s)). 

One useful consequence of this algorithm is that the series of extrema that 
it  identifies  contains  alternating minima  and  maxima.  That  is,  if  the  hth 
extremum  is  a  maximum, then it is always the  case  that the  (h +  11th ex- 
tremum is a  minimum  and vice versa. 

An  important advantage of  using this kernel regression approach to iden- 
tify patterns is the fact that it ignores extrema that are "too local." For exam- 
ple, a simpler alternative is to identify local extrema from the raw price data 
directly, that is, identify a price Pt as a local maximum ifP,+, < P,  and Pt >Pt+, 
and vice versa for a local minimum. The problem with this approach is that it 
identifies too many extrema and also yields patterns that are not visually con- 
sistent with the kind of patterns that technical  analysts find compelling. 

Once we have identified all of  the local  extrema in the window  [t, t + l  + 
d  - 11, we  can  proceed  to  check  for  the  presence  of  the  various  technical 
patterns  using  the  definitions  of  Section  1I.A. This  procedure  is  then  re- 
peated  for the next window  [t + 1, t + I  + d ]  and continues until the end of 
the  sample is reached  a t  the window  [ T  - 1 - d + 1 , T l .  

C.  Empirical Examples 

To  see  how  our  algorithm  performs  in practice,  we  apply  it to  the  daily 
returns  of  a  single  security, CTX, during the five-year period  from  1992 to 
1996. Figures  3-7  plot  occurrences  of  the  five  pairs  of  patterns  defined  in 
Section 1I.A that were identified by  our algorithm. Note that there were no 
rectangle bottoms  detected  for  CTX during this  period,  so for  completeness 
we  substituted  a  rectangle bottom  for  CDO  stock  that  occurred  during  the 
same period. 

In each of these graphs, the solid lines are the raw prices, the dashed lines 
are the kernel estimators mh(.), the circles  indicate the local  extrema, and 
the  vertical  line  marks  date  t  + 1 - 1, the  day  that  the  final  extremum 
occurs to complete  the pattern. 

Casual inspection by  several professional technical  analysts seems to con- 
firm the  ability  of  our  automated  procedure  to  match  human judgment  in 
identifying the five pairs of patterns in Section 1I.A. Of course, this is merely 
anecdotal  evidence  and  not  meant  to  be  conclusive-we  provide  these  fig- 
ures simply to illustrate  the output  of  a  technical  pattern-recognition  algo- 
rithm based  on  kernel regression. 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

1721 

(b) Inverse Head-and-Shoulders 

Figure 3.  Head-and-shoulders and inverse head-and-shoulders. 

1722 

The Journal  of Finance 

(a) Broadening Top 

(b) Broadening Bottom 

Figure 4. Broadening tops and bottoms. 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

1723 

(a) Triangle Top 

(b) Triangle Bottom 

Figure 5. Triangle tops and bottoms. 

1724 

The Journal  of  Finance 

(a)  Rectangle Top 

(b)  Rectangle  Bottom 

Figure 6. Rectangle tops and bottoms. 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

1725 

(a)  Double Top 

(b) Double Bottom 

Figure 7.  Double tops and bottoms. 

The Journal  o f  Finance 

111.  Is Technical Analysis Informative? 

Although  there have been many tests of  technical analysis over the years, 
most  of  these  tests  have  focused  on  the  profitability  of  technical  trading 
rules.9 Although some of  these  studies do  find that technical indicators can 
generate  statistically  significant  trading profits, but  they beg  the question 
of  whether  or not  such profits are merely  the equilibrium  rents that accrue 
to investors  willing  to bear the risks associated  with  such strategies. With- 
out specifying a fully articulated dynamic general equilibrium  asset-pricing 
model, it is impossible  to  determine the economic source  of  trading profits. 
Instead,  we  propose  a  more  fundamental  test  in  this  section,  one  that 
attempts to gauge the information  content  in the technical patterns of  Sec- 
tion  1I.A by  comparing  the  unconditional  empirical  distribution  of  returns 
with the corresponding conditional empirical distribution, conditioned on the 
occurrence of  a technical pattern. If technical patterns are informative,  con- 
ditioning  on  them  should  alter the empirical  distribution  of  returns; if  the 
information  contained in  such patterns has  already been  incorporated  into 
returns, the conditional  and unconditional  distribution of  returns should be 
close. Although  this is a weaker  test  of  the effectiveness  of  technical  analy- 
is, 
sis-informativeness  does not guarantee a profitable  trading strategy-it 
nevertheless,  a natural first step in a  quantitative  assessment  of  technical 
analysis. 

To  measure  the  distance  between  the  two  distributions,  we  propose  two 
goodness-of-fit measures in Section 1II.A. We  apply these  diagnostics to the 
daily  returns  of  individual  stocks  from  1962 to  1996 using  a  procedure  de- 
scribed  in  Sections  1II.B to  III.D,  and  the  results  are  reported  in  Sec- 
tions  1II.E and 1II.F. 

A.  Goodness-of-Fit Tests 

A simple  diagnostic  to  test  the  informativeness of  the  10 technical  pat- 
terns is to  compare  the  quantiles  of  the  conditional  returns  with  their  un- 
conditional counterparts. If conditioning on these technical patterns provides 
no incremental information, the quantiles of  the conditional returns  should 
be  similar to  those  of  unconditional  returns. In particular, we  compute  the 

" For example, Chang and Osler (1994) and Osler and Chang (1995) propose  an algorithm for 
automatically  detecting  head-and-shoulders  patterns  in  foreign  exchange  data  by  looking  a t  
properly defined local extrema. To  assess the efficacy of  a head-and-shoulders trading rule, they 
take  a  stand  on  a  class  of  trading  strategies  and  compute  the  profitability  of  these  across  a 
sample of exchange rates against the U.S. dollar. The null return distribution  is computed by  a 
bootstrap  that  samples  returns randomly  from the original  data so  as to  induce  temporal  in- 
dependence  in  the  bootstrapped  time  series.  By  comparing  the  actual  returns  from  trading 
strategies to the bootstrapped  distribution,  the authors  find that for two  of  the six currencies 
in  their  sample  (the  yen  and  the  Deutsche  mark), trading  strategies  based  on  a  head-and- 
shoulders  pattern  can  lead  to  statistically  significant  profits.  See,  also,  Neftci  and  Policano 
(1984), Pruitt  and White  (1988), and  Brock  et  al.  (1992). 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

1727 

deciles  of  unconditional  returns  and  tabulate  the  relative  frequency  8j  of 
conditional  returns  falling  into  decile j  of  the  unconditional  returns, j  = 
1 , .. . ,lo: 

J -

A6 

number of conditional returns in decile j
total number of  conditional returns 

' 

(15)

Under  the  null  hypothesis  that  the  returns  are independently  and identi- 
cally  distributed  (IID) and the  conditional  and  unconditional  distributions 
are identical, the asymptotic distributions ofSj and the corresponding goodness- 
of-fit test  statistic Q are given  by 

Q - Clo (nj - 0 . 1 0 n ) ~

"xi,

0.10n 

j=l 

where nj is the number of  observations  that fall in decile j  and n is the total 
number of  observations  (see, e.g., DeGroot  (1986)). 

Another  comparison of  the  conditional and unconditional  distributions  of 
returns is provided by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test. Denote by { Z , , ) ~ L ~  
and 
{Z2,}~21two  samples  that  are each  IID with  cumulative  distribution  func- 
tions Fl(z) and F,(z),  respectively. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov  statistic is de- 
signed to test the null hypothesis that Fl = F,  and is based on the empirical 
cumulative distribution  functions Fi of  both  samples: 

where I ( . )  is the indicator function. The statistic is given by  the expression 

Under the null hypothesis Fl = F,,  the statistic y,Ll,,2 should be  small. More- 
over, Smirnov (1939a, 1939b) derives the limiting distribution of the statistic 
to be 

lim 

r n i n ( 1 ~ ~ , 7 1 ~ ) + m  

P r ~ b ( y , , , , ~5 x) =  C,  (-1)' exp(-2k2x2), 
k = - 00 

x > 0. 

(20)

1728 

The Journal  of Finance 

An approximate a-level test of  the null hypothesis can be performed by com- 
puting  the  statistic  and  rejecting  the  null  if  it  exceeds  the  upper  lOOwth 
percentile for the null distribution given by equation (20) (see Hollander and 
Wolfe  (1973, Table A.23), Csaki (1984), and Press et al. (1986, Chap.  13.5)). 
Note  t h a t   the  sampling  distributions  of  both  the  goodness-of-fit  and 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov  statistics  are derived  under  the  assumption  that  re- 
turns are IID, which  is not  plausible  for  financial data. We  attempt  to  ad- 
dress this problem  by  normalizing  the  returns  of  each  security, that is, by 
subtracting its mean and dividing by  its standard deviation  (see Sec. III.C), 
but  this  does  not  eliminate  the  dependence  or  heterogeneity.  We  hope  to 
extend our analysis to the more  general non-IID  case in future research. 

B.  The Data  and  Sampling Procedure 

We  apply the  goodness-of-fit  and  Kolmogorov-Smirnov  tests  to  the daily 
returns  of  individual  NYSE/AMEX  and  Nasdaq  stocks  from  1962 to  1996 
using  data  from  the  Center  for  Research  in  Securities  Prices  (CRSP). To 
ameliorate the effects of  nonstationarities induced by  changing market struc- 
ture and institutions, we  split the data into NYSE/AMEX  stocks  and Nas- 
daq  stocks  and  into  seven  five-year periods:  1962  to  1966,  1967 to  1971, 
and  so  on.  To  obtain  a  broad  cross  section  of  securities,  in  each  five-year 
subperiod,  we  randomly  select  10  stocks  from  each  of  five  market- 
capitalization  quintiles  (using mean  market  capitalization over the subperi- 
od),  with  the  further  restriction  that  a t   least  75  percent  of  the  price 
observations  must  be  nonmissing  during  the  subperiod.10  This  procedure 
yields  a  sample  of  50  stocks  for  each  subperiod  across  seven  subperiods 
(note  that  we  sample  with  replacement;  hence  there  may  be  names  in 
common  across  subperiods). 

As  a  check  on  the robustness  of  our inferences, we perform  this sampling 
procedure twice to construct two samples, and we apply our empirical analy- 
sis  to  both. Although  we  report  results  only  from  the first  sample to  con- 
serve  space,  the  results  of  the  second  sample  are  qualitatively  consistent 
with the first and are available upon  request. 

C.  Computing  Conditional Returns 

For each stock in each subperiod, we  apply the procedure outlined in Sec- 
tion  I1 to identify all occurrences of  the  10 patterns defined in Section 1I.A. 
For  each  pattern  detected,  we  compute  the  one-day  continuously  com- 
pounded  return  d  days  after  the  pattern  has  completed.  Specifically,  con- 
sider  a  window  of  prices  { P , )  from t  to  t  + I  + d  - 1 and  suppose  that the 

If the first price observation  of  a stock is missing, we  set it equal to the first nonmissing 
price in the series. If the tth price observation is missing, we set it equal to the first nonmissing 
price  prior  to t. 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

1729 

identified pattern p  is completed at t  + I  - 1.Then we  take the conditional 
return R P  as log(1 + Rt kI  , i ,   Therefore, for each stock, we have  10 sets of 
such  conditional  returns,  each  conditioned  on  one  of  the  10  patterns  of 
Section  1I.A. 

For each stock, we  construct  a sample of  unconditional continuously com- 
pounded returns using nonoverlapping intervals of length T, and we compare 
the empirical  distribution  functions  of  these returns with those of  the con- 
ditional returns. To  facilitate such comparisons, we standardize all returns- 
both  conditional  and unconditional-by 
standard deviations, hence: 

subtracting means  and  dividing  by 

where the means and standard deviations are computed for each individual 
stock  within  each  subperiod. Therefore,  by  construction,  each  normalized 
return  series has zero mean and unit variance. 

Finally, to increase the power  of  our goodness-of-fit tests, we combine the 
normalized  returns  of  all  50  stocks  within  each  subperiod; hence  for  each 
subperiod  we  have  two  samples-unconditional 
and  from  these  we  compute  two  empirical  distribution  functions  that  we 
compare using our diagnostic  test statistics. 

and  conditional  returns- 

D.  Conditioning on Volume 

Given the prominent role that volume plays in technical  analysis, we also 
construct  returns  conditioned  on  increasing  or  decreasing volume.  Specifi- 
cally, for each stock in each subperiod, we  compute its average share turn- 
over  during  the  first  and  second  halves  of  each  subperiod,  T,  and  T,, 
respectively.  If  T,  > 1.2  x  3,we  categorize this  as  a  "decreasing volume" 
event; if T2  > 1.2 X  T ~ ,we categorize this as an "increasing volume" event. If 
neither  of  these  conditions  holds,  then neither  event is  considered  to  have 
occurred. 

Using  these  events, we  can  construct  conditional  returns  conditioned  on 
two  pieces  of  information: the occurrence  of  a technical  pattern  and the oc- 
currence  of  increasing  or  decreasing volume.  Therefore,  we  shall  compare 
the  empirical  distribution  of  unconditional  returns  with  three  conditional- 
return distributions: the distribution of returns conditioned on technical pat- 
terns, the distribution conditioned on technical patterns and increasing volume, 
and the distribution conditioned on technical patterns and decreasing volume. 
Of  course, other conditioning variables can easily be incorporated into this 
procedure,  though  the  "curse  of  dimensionality"  imposes  certain  practical 
limits  on  the  ability  to  estimate  multivariate  conditional  distributions 
nonparametrically. 

The Journal  of  Finance 

E.  Summary  Statistics 

In Tables I and 11, we report frequency counts for the number of  patterns 
detected over the entire 1962 to 1996 sample, and within each subperiod and 
each  market-capitalization  quintile,  for  the  10  patterns  defined  in  Sec- 
tion 1I.A. Table I contains results for the NYSE/AMEX  stocks, and Table I1 
contains  corresponding results  for Nasdaq  stocks. 

Table I  shows that the most  common patterns  across  all  stocks  and over 
the entire  sample period  are double tops  and bottoms  (see the row  labeled 
"Entire"), with  over  2,000  occurrences  of  each.  The  second  most  common 
patterns are the head-and-shoulders and inverted head-and-shoulders, with 
over 1,600 occurrences of each. These total counts correspond roughly to four 
to  six occurrences  of  each of  these patterns for each stock during each five- 
year  subperiod  (divide the total  number  of  occurrences  by  7  x  50), not  an 
unreasonable frequency from the point  of  view  of  professional  technical  an- 
alysts.  Table  I  shows  that  most  of  the  10 patterns  are  more  frequent  for 
larger stocks  than for  smaller ones and that they  are relatively  evenly dis- 
tributed  over  the  five-year  subperiods.  When  volume  trend  is  considered 
jointly  with the occurrences  of  the  10 patterns, Table I  shows that the fre- 
quency  of  patterns  is  not  evenly  distributed  between  increasing  (the row 
labeled "r(/1)") and decreasing (the row labeled " r ( ~ ) " )  volume-trend cases. 
For  example, for the entire sample of  stocks  over the  1962 to  1996 sample 
period,  there  are  143 occurrences  of  a  broadening  top  with  decreasing  vol- 
ume trend but 409  occurrences  of  a broadening  top with increasing volume 
trend. 

For purposes  of  comparison, Table I also reports frequency counts for the 
number  of  patterns  detected  in  a  sample of  simulated  geometric  Brownian 
motion,  calibrated to match the mean  and standard deviation  of  each stock 
in  each  five-year  subperiod.11 The  entries  in  the  row  labeled  "Sim. GBM" 
show that the random walk model yields very different implications for the 
frequency counts  of  several  technical  patterns. For  example, the simulated 
sample  has  only  577  head-and-shoulders  and  578  inverted-head-and- 
shoulders patterns, whereas  the actual data have  considerably  more,  1,611 
and 1,654, respectively. On the other hand, for broadening tops and bottoms, 
the simulated sample contains many more occurrences than the actual data, 
1,227 and  1,028, compared  to  725 and 748, respectively. The number  of  tri- 
angles is roughly comparable across the two samples, but for rectangles and 

l1 In  particular,  let t h e  price  process  satisfy 

where  W ( t )is a  standard  Brownian  motion. To generate  simulated  prices  for  a  single  security 
i n  a  given period,  w e  estimate t h e  security's d r i f t  and  diffusion coefficients b y  m a x i m u m  like- 
lihood  and  t h e n  simulate  prices  using t h e  estimated  parameter  values. An  independent price 
series  is  simulated  for  each  o f  t h e  350  securities  i n  b o t h  t h e  NYSEIAR4EX  and  t h e  Nasdaq 
samples.  Finally, w e  u s e  our pattern-recognition  algorithm t o  detect t h e  occurrence  o f  each o f  
t h e  10  patterns  i n  t h e  simulated  price  series. 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

1731 

double tops  and bottoms, the differences  are dramatic.  Of  course, the simu- 
lated  sample is  only  one realization  of  geometric Brownian  motion,  so it is 
difficult to draw general conclusions  about the relative  frequencies. Never- 
theless,  these  simulations  point  to  important differences  between  the data 
and IID lognormal  returns. 

To  develop further intuition for these patterns, Figures 8 and 9 display the 
cross-sectional and time-series distribution of each of the 10 patterns for the 
NYSE/AMEX  and Nasdaq  samples, respectively.  Each  symbol represents  a 
pattern  detected  by  our  algorithm, the vertical  axis is divided  into the five 
size quintiles, the horizontal axis is calendar time, and alternating symbols 
(diamonds and asterisks) represent  distinct subperiods. These graphs show 
that the distribution  of  patterns is not clustered in time or  among a  subset 
of  securities. 

Table  I1 provides  the  same frequency counts  for  Nasdaq  stocks,  and  de- 
spite the fact that we have the same number of  stocks in this sample (50 per 
subperiod  over  seven subperiods), there are considerably fewer patterns de- 
tected than in the NYSE/AMEX case. For example, the Nasdaq sample yields 
only  919  head-and-shoulders  patterns,  whereas  the  NYSE/AMEX  sample 
contains 1,611. Not  surprisingly, the frequency counts for the sample of  sim- 
ulated geometric Brownian  motion  are similar to those in Table  I. 

Tables I11 and IV report summary statistics-means, 

standard deviations, 
skewness, and excess kurtosis-of  unconditional and conditional normalized 
returns  of  NYSE/AMEX  and  Nasdaq  stocks,  respectively.  These  statistics 
show  considerable variation in the different  return populations. For  exam- 
ple, in Table I11 the first four moments of  normalized raw returns are 0.000, 
1.000, 0.345, and 8.122, respectively. The same four moments  of  post-BTOP 
returns  are  -0.005,  1.035,  -1.151,  and  16.701,  respectively,  and  those  of 
post-DTOP returns  are 0.017, 0.910, 0.206, and 3.386, respectively.  The dif- 
ferences in these statistics among the 10 conditional return populations,  and 
the  differences  between  the  conditional  and  unconditional  return  popula- 
tions,  suggest  that  conditioning  on  the  10  technical  indicators  does  have 
some effect  on  the distribution  of  returns. 

l?  Empirical  Results 

Tables  V  and VI  report  the  results  of  the goodness-of-fit  test  (equations 
(16) and  (17)) for  our  sample  of  NYSE  and AMEX  (Table V)  and  Nasdaq 
(Table VI) stocks, respectively, from 1962 to 1996 for each of  the 10 technical 
patterns. Table  V shows  that in the NYSE/AMEX  sample, the relative  fre- 
quencies of  the conditional returns  are significantly different  from those of 
the unconditional returns for seven of  the  10 patterns considered. The three 
exceptions  are the  conditional  returns  from  the  BBOT,  TTOP,  and  DBOT 
patterns, for which the p-values of  the test statistics Q are 5.1 percent, 21.2 
percent,  and  16.6 percent,  respectively.  These  results  yield  mixed  support 
for the overall efficacy of technical indicators. However, the results of Table VI 
tell a different story: there is overwhelming significance for all 10 indicators 

Table I 
Frequency  counts for  10 technical  indicators detected  among NYSE/AMEX  stocks from  1962 to  1996, in five-year  subperiods, in size quintiles, 
and in a sample of simulated geometric Brownian motion. In each five-year subperiod, 10 stocks per quintile are selected a t  random among stocks 
with a t  least 80% nonmissing  prices,  and each stock's  price history is scanned for  any occurrence of  the following  10 technical  indicators within 
the  subperiod: head-and-shoulders (HS), inverted head-and-shoulders  (IHS), broadening top  (BTOP), broadening  bottom  (BBOT), triangle top 
(TTOP), triangle bottom  ITBOT), rectangle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom  (RBOT), double top (DTOP), and double bottom  (DBOT). The "Sample" 
column  indicates  whether  the frequency  counts are conditioned on decreasing volume  trend  ('r(\)'), 
increasing volume trend  1'r(/1)'), uncondi- 
tional  ("Entiren), or  for  a  sample of  simulated  geometric Brownian  motion  with  parameters  calibrated  to match  the data ("Sim. GBM). 

I-'
-4 
W 

Sample 

Raw 

HS 

IHS 

BTOP 

BBOT 

TTOP 

TBOT 

RTOP 

RBOT 

UTOP 

UBOT 

Entire 
Sim. GBM 
~ ( L J  
.r(Pi 

Entlre 
Sim. GBM 
T ( L )  
~ ( 7 )  

Xntire 
Sim. GBM 

7(\) 
r ( r )  

Entire 
Sim. GUM 
r i b )  
r ( ? i  

Entire 
Sim  GUM 
T ( L )  
~ ( 7 1  

Xntire 
Sim. GUM 
T ( L ~  
7 i P l  

All  Stocks,  1962 to  1996 
1294 
1049 
666 
300 

748 
1028 
220 
337 

Smallest Quintilr,  1962 to  1996 

97 
256 
42 
37 

203 
269 
122 
41 

2nd Quintile, 1962 to  1996 

150 
251 
48 
63 

255 
261 
135 
55 

3rd Quintile,  1962 l o  1996 

161 
222 
49 
66 

291 
212 
151 
67 

4th  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

173 
210 
42 
89 

262 
183 
138 
56 

Largest Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

167 
89 
39 
82 

283 
124 
120 
8 1  

Entire 
Sim. GBM 
' ( L )  
r ( ? )  

Entire 
Sim. GBM 

T ( L )  

r ( ? )  

Entire 
Sim. GBM 

T ( L )  
r ( P )  

Entlre 
Sim. GRM 

T ( L )  
r ( P )  

Entire 
Sim. GRM 
' ( L )  
r ( P )  

Entire 
Slm. GRM 

T ( L )  
~ ( 3 )  

Entire 
Sim. GRM 
'(\I 
r ( r i  

All  Stocks,  1962 to  1966 


103 
126 
29 
39 

179 

129 

93 

37 


All  Stocks,  1967 to  1971 


134 
148 
45 
57 

227 

150 

126 

47 


All  Stocks,  1972 to  1976 


93 
154 
23 
50 

165 

156 

88 

32 


All  Stocks,  1977 to  1981 


110 
200 
39 
44 

188 

188 

100 

35 


All  Stocks,  1982 to  1986 


108 
144 
30 
62 

182 

152 

93 

46 


All  Stocks, 1987 to  1991 


98 
132 
30 
43 

180 

131 

86 

53 


All  Stocks, 1992 to  1996 


102 
124 
24 
42 

173 

143 

80 

50 


Table I1 
Frequency  counts for  10 technical  indicators detected  among Nasdaq  stocks from 1962 to  1996, in five-year  subperiods, in size quintiles, and in 
a sample of  simulated geometric Brownian motion. In each five-year subperiod, 10 stocks per quintile are selected a t  random among stocks with 
a t  least  80% nonmissing prices,  and each  stock's  price  history is scanned for any occurrence of  the following 10 technical indicators within  the 
subperiod: head-and-shoulders (HS); inverted head-and-shoulders (IHS), broadening top (BTOP), broadening bottom  (BBOT), triangle top ITTOP), 
triangle bottom  (TBOT), rectangle top  (RTOP), rectangle  bottom  (RBOT), double top  (DTOP), and double bottom  (DBOT). The "Sample" column 
unconditional
indicates whether  the frequency  counts  are conditioned on  decreasing volume  trend  ( " ~ ( h ) " ) ,  
("Entire"), or  for  a  sample of  simulated  geometric Brownian  motion  with  parameters  calibrated to  match  the data  ("Sirn.  GBM"). 
.. 

increasing volume  trend  ( " ~ ( p ) " ) ,  

.-... 

.-

. 

-----

---

. 

.--

!+ 
-3 
CS 

Samplc 

Entire 
Sim. GEM 
' ( L )  
T ( ? I  

Entire 
Sim.  GBM 
T ( L >  

T ( ? )  

Entire 
Sim. GBM 
'(\I 
T(?) 

Entirc 
Sim. GBM 
'(L) 
T(?) 

Entirc 
Sim. GBM 
T ( L )  
T(?) 

Entire 
Sim. GHM 

T ( L )  
T(?) 

Raw 

.- .- --

411,010 
411,010 
.-
-

81,754 
81,754 
.-

-

81,336 
81.336 
.-

.-

81,772 
81,772 
-

-

82,727 
82,727 
-
-

83,421 
83,421 
-
-

..-..-

HS 

919 
434 
408 

284 

84 
85 
36 
31 

191 
67 
94 
66 

224 
69 
108 
7 1 

212 
104 
88 
62 

208 
109 
82 
54 

IHS 

817 
447 
268 

325 

64 
84 
25 
23 

138 
84 
5 1  
57 

186 
86 
66 
79 

214 
92 
68 
83 

215 
101 
58 
83 

RTOP 

BBOT 

-- -..-

TTOP 

TBOT 

.. 

-

414 
1297 
69 

234 

41 
341 
6 
31 

68 
243 
11 
46 

105 
227 
23 
56 

92 
242 
12 
57 

108 
244 
17 
44 

All  Stocks,  1962 to  1996 
850 
1169 
429 

508 
1139 
133 

209 

185 

Smallest Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

73 
289 
20 
30 

111 
334 
66 
24 

2nd  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

88 
225 
28 
38 

161 
219 
86 
45 

3rd Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

121 
210 
35 
49 

183 
214 
87 
39 

4th  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

116 
219 
26 
56 

187 
209 
101 
34 

Idurgest Quintile.  1962 to  1996 

110 
196 
24 
36 

208 
193 
99 
43 

789 
1309 
460 

125 

93 
367 
59 
15 

148 
229 
109 
22 

155 
239 
9 1  
29 

179 
255 
101 
22 

214 
219 
100 
37 

RTOP 

1134 
96 
488 

391 

165 
11 
77 
59 

242 
24 
111 
85 

235 
15 
90 
84 

296 
23 
127 
104 

196 
23 
83 
59 

IZROT 
.  -.  .-

DTOP 
.-. 

DBOT 
-

1320 
9 1  
550 

461 

218 
12 
102 
85 

305 
12 
131 
120 

244 
14 
84 
86 

303 
26 
141 
Y3 

250 
27 
92 
77 

1208 
567 
339 

474 

113 
140 
31 
46 

219 
99 
69 
90 

279 
105 
78 
122 

289 
115 
77 
118 

308 
108 
8 4  
98 

1147 
h3 
579 
580  $ 
q 
229 
0 

125 
125 

3 
8 1   5
l7  % 
% 
5' 
!a 
2 
m 


176 
124 
101 
42 

267 
100 
145 
58

29 7 
97 
143 
66 

282 
133 
110 
46 

Entire 
Sim. GBM 
r(\) 
~ ( r )  

Entlre 
Slm  GBM 
r(\) 
~ ( 7 )  

Entirc 
Sim. GBM 
'(\I 
~ ( 7 )  

Entirc 
Sim. GBM 

T ( L )  
~ ( 1 1 )  

Entirc 
Sim. GBM 
T ( \ )  
~ ( 7 )  

Entirc 
Sim. GBM 
+ L )  
~ ( 7 )  

Entirc 
Sim. GBM 
'(\I 
~ ( 7 )  

All  Stocks,  1962 to  1966 


99 
123 
23 
5 1 

182 

137 

104 

37 


All  Stock?, 1967 to  1971 


123 
184 
40 
51 

227 

181 

127 

45 


All  Stock?, 1972 to  1976 


30 
113 
4 
2 

29 

107 

5 

2 


A11  Stocks  1977 to  1981 


36 
165 
2 
I 

52 

176 

4 

4 


All  Stock?, 1982 to  1986 


44 
168 
14 
18 

97 

147 

46 

26 


All  Stock?, 1987 to  1991 


61 
187 
19 
30 

120 

205 

73 

26 


All  Stock?, 1992 to  1996 


115 
199 
31 
56 

143 

216 

70 

45 


1736 

The Journal  of  Finance 

Date 

(a) 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

Date 

(dl 

Figure 8. Continued 

The Journal  of  Finance 

Date 
(el 

Date 

(f) 

Figure 8.  Continued 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

RTOP  (NYSEIAMEX) 

w-.-+ c.-
6 

5 

4 

3 
w-.-+ 
.-
6 

2 

1 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 
Date 

(9) 

1985 

1990 

1995 

RTOP  (NYSEIAMEX) 

*  **  *** 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 

Date 

(h) 

1985 

1990 

1995 

Figure 8. Continued 

1740 

The Jourrzal  o f  Finarzce 

DTOP  (NYSUAMEX) 

Date 

(i) 

Date 

(1) 

Figure 8. Continued 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

HS  (NASDAQ) 

* 

O 

O 0 * * *  

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 

Date 

(a) 

IHS  (NASDAQ) 

1985 

1990 

1995 

0-.--c.-
6 

a,-.-+ 
.-
6 

Y V   + ^  

1965 

1970 

0  0  * *  

0 

1985 

1990 

1995 

1975 

1980 
Date 

(b) 

Figure 9. Distribution of  patterns in Nasdaq  sample. 

The Journal  of  Finance 

* * O   ,* 

@ 

BTOP  (NASDAQ) 

*C  0 
*Mi 
* 
* *  * 

*  0 

v *  

* 
0 *  

00  0 
*A  9
*  * 
*

* * 

* * 

*  * 
* * *  
aoOO  O *  * ** *  
@  % *  * *  
0 

** 

Mi 

00 0 

* 
* 

" 
*  0 
* *   0
2 0 0  

0 

O *   * 'Ht ** 
,** *** 

v v o  

0 0 %  
0 

C

0 

0 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 

Date 

, 
1985 

0 
1990 

0  O0 

OC 

 a 

O I

1995 

50 

4 -

A 
i  V 

* 

O m @  

* 
*  * * *  
* *  * 
0 %   & *  

BTOP  (NASDAQ) 

,,

A 

h 
V

V b  

*  " 
****0  ,,
* 
* 
* *  **  0 
v *  

0 

@ 

O 

0 0 

Mi 

00 0 

% 

% * *  

* 
o *  

* * 

*
* 

*  * 
*  * 
**. 
, % * * *  
* 

0 
,I?  0 

"  0  so0;*.

$ " @0, 

*  * 
**  * *  
, *

1965 

1970 

1975 

* * *   0 %  
00  0 
* A   9
*  * 
* 
* * 

O *   * 'Ht ** 
,** *** 
* 
v0 
0 0 %  
0 

v v o ,

C

0

0 

*  O o

0  Oo 

, 
1980 
Date 

i 
1985 

, 
1990 

OC 

v o , a  
1995 

Figure 9. Continued 

 
Foundations  of' Technical Analysis 

Date 

(e) 

Date 
(0 

Figure 9. Continued 

1744 

The Joul-nal of  Finance 

A  A 

0 

0 

RTOP  (NASDAQ) 
I  * 
* 
o * , *   * 

*, 

0 

A  A 

@3  o o * *   * 

Date 

(9) 

RBOT  (NASDAQ) 

a, -.-+ 
.-
6 

* * 

* *  

*  0 

00 

* % * * *  

*  @  0   OQO 

1965 

1970 

1975 

1980 
Date 

(h) 

1985 

1990 

1995 

Figure 9. Continued 

F o ~ ~ n d a t i o n sof  Technical Analysis 

DTOP  (NASDAQ1 

Date 
0) 


Date 

(J) 

Figure 9.  Continued 

Table I11 
Summary statistics  (mean, standard  deviation, skewness, and  excess  kurtosis) of  raw  and  conditional  one-day  normalized  returns  of  NYSE/ 
AMEX  stocks from  1962 to  1996, in five-year  subperiods, and in size quintiles.  Conditional returns are defined  as the daily  return three days 
following the conclusion of  a n  occurrence of  one of  10 technical  indicators:  head-and-shoulders (HS), inverted head-and-shoulders (IHS), broad-
ening top  (BTOP), broadening  bottom  (BBOT), triangle  top  (TTOP), triangle  bottom  (TBOT), rectangle top  (RTOI'),  rectangle  bottom  (RBOT). 
double top (DTOP), and  double  bottom  (DBOT). All returns have  been normalized  by  subtraction  of  their means  and division  by  their standard 
deviations. 

Moment 

Raw 

NS 

IIIS 

BTOP 

BBOT 

TTOI' 

TBOT 

RTOIJ 

~..-

RBOT 

DTOP 

IIHOT 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt. 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew 
Kurt. 

Mean 
S.D 
Skew 
Kurt . 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt. 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt. 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt. 

All  Stocks,  1962 to  1996 
0.021 
-0.062 
0.955 
0.979 
0.137 
0.090 
3.293 
3 169 

Smallest  Quintile, 1962 to  1996 

-0.188 
0.850 
-0.367 
0.575 

0.036 
0.937 
0.861 
4.185 

2nd Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

-0.113 
1.004 
0.485 
3.779 

0.003 
0.913 
-0.529 
3.024 

3rd  Quintile, 1962 to  1996 
0.036 
0.973 
0.538 
2.995 

-0.056 
0.925 
0.233 
0.611 

4th Quintile.  1962 to  1996 

0 028 
1.093 
0.537 
2.168 

0.022 
0.986 
-0.217 
4.237 

Largest  Quintrie,  1962 to  1996 

-0.042 
0.951 
-1.099 
6.603 

0.010 
0.964 
0.089 
2.107 

Foundations  of  Technical Analysis 

O N ~ N m m - m  
t - m o m  
O C O C - m  
-9.q 
q o q r - m  
o o a m   O O O i
I 

I 

m m w c   m m d o   m w c o   C N ~ C  ~ ~ m m m  
o o m e  

o d m m m  

c m i m  
d  ~  w 
I ~ N N   q q c q ?  

o a o m   O i N m   0 - a t -
I 

I 

I 

i m r - L C  
2 2 ~ ;   q q m o ?  
a - a m  
I 

I 

I 

-


- + - $ c o o  
  m m w m   m i m m  

i m c m   m m o c  
e m m i
X $ g z   Z Z Z $   0 " " "  
0 0 0 m  
I 

I 

I 

~ t
-
d m w m  
0 " " "  
- C O N  

i m  r i o m m   m m d m   m o i c
o o w m o
~ 

c  m 

- + L O N -
" " " L D  
0 0 o i  

:

,

 -!".L?

0 0 0 - 


I 

I 

I 


m d - o  
d i m 0  
$ 

I 

o m m d   m d m c  
a m m m  
i w m m  
",?Z  0 " " " "  
I 

o m m m   m w m m
~m m c d
W 
~ 
d m m m
~ m m m  o m w m   m m m t -
" " e m  
a ? " "  
" " " 5  
o o o w  
o o o m  
I 
I 

C O O N   o a o d  

O 

C 

- r ( ~ r (   i
m w m w  
e q c o y  
o o i c  
1

-

i m w   m o e c  

o m m m   N C ~ N o m m r -

e m d o  
o ? q ?   o t - 9 5  
o o o m   o o o -
I 

I 

I 

o o d m  
I 
I 

o 
~ 
~ 
m m m o  
q m q f l  
o o o -

i o d m m
m 
e m m e   m i w o  
9 ~ 9 . q  
o o o i   o o o o  

m e t - m  

I 

m r t b w  
m r i c . o ~   m m m m  
8 3 2 2   O F ? ?   X%?$ 

0 0 0 3  

- N C -

c  w  ~  m O N ~ N  o i o m  

- m  

e - m m  
w o d c  
m i
0 " " "  
" " - 9  
0 i 0 0   = = + L C   0 0 - 0 ,  
I 

m - w w  
o m - m  
0 " " "  

I 

I 

I 

I 

- m o m
d r - m m
0 бу F "  
O ~ N N  

m m m r -
m ~ w m  m a 0 0  
- , o q m q  
o o a o   a 0 0 0  

m m d
0 7 9 ~  

- m m ~  w m m i
t - i m w  
o m m w  
0 0 , " "  
o i

0 o o c . o  

~ 

~

i m m w  
d o t - m  
a f l c o "  

- m m c  
i  w  m
m m o a   m o m m  
y d q q  
0 9 f l m .  

~ 

i d   0 - O N   o o o ~ o i m t -
I 

I 

I N  

I 

o 
t - m m i  
9 y - w  
0 0 0 0  

c  m  ~ d m b d   m m e w   m w e m   m m d a  

e m m m
m o m m   m i m m   m m m m   m m m m   m e d m   m m e m

c m w m  
o q q m   q ~ ! q q  

o o m q  
o - o m  
I 

I 

i c m -
o o o i   o o o ~ o o o m  
I 

9 m . q  

I 

I 

I 

I 

0 0 0 m  
I 

o o o m  
I 

o o m i
0 0 ~ 0 w  o o m i
XS$",S=% 

o o m o  

o o m o  
  0 0 - N  

o o w m  
o o m r (  

$ 2 2 2   X z g z   :

I 

I 

I 

I 

o o o m  
o a m m   0 o - t -

o o m m  

,

 :

I 

1

-

,

o o m m
o o o m  

 922,"

I 

I 

I 

 
 
 
Table IV 
Summary statistics (mean, standard  deviation, skewness, and  excess  kurtosis) of  raw  and conditional  one-day  normalized  returns  of  Nasdaq 
stocks from  1962 to 1996, in five-year subperiods, and in size quintiles. Conditional returns are defined a s  the daily return three days following 
the conclusion  of  an occurrence  of  one  of  10 t,echnical indicators:  head-and-shouldttrs (HS), inverted  head-and-shoulders  (II-IS), broadening  top 
(BTOP), broadening  bottom  (RROT), triangle top  (TTOP), triangle bottom  (TBOT), rectangle top (ItTOP), rectangle  bottom  (RBOT), double top 
(DTOP), and double bottom  (DBOT). All  returns have been normalized  by  subtraction  oftheir means and division by  their standard deviations. 

Moment 

Raw 

HS 

IHS 

BTOI' 

BBOT 

TTOI' 

TBOT 

RTOI' 

RBOT 

DTOP 

DBOT 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt. 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt . 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt. 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skevi. 
Kurt. 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt. 

Mean 
S.D. 
Skew. 
Kurt. 

All  Stocks,  1962 to  1996 
-0.020 
0.984 

0.895 

6.692 

0.009 
0.995 
0 586 
2.783 

Smallest Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

- 0.153 
0.894 
-0.109 
0.571 

0.069 
1.113 

2 727 

14.270 

2nd Quintile,  1962 to 1996 

0 . 0 8 5   

0.805 
0.036 

0.689 


-0.093 
1.026 
0.636 
:I458 

3rd Quintrlr,  1962 to 1996 

0.210 
0.971 
0.326 
0.430 

- 0.030 
0.825 
0.639 
1.673 


4th Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

0 . 0 8 0  
1.076 
0.554 
7.723 

- 0.044 
0.975 
0.385 
1.601 

Largcst  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

0.031 
1.060 
1.225 
0.778 

0 052 
1.076 
0.409 
1.970 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

- 0 - m  
m a m m  
o m ? ?  
0 0 0 0  
I 

w 3 - m  
o m m e  
q q v . q
0 0 3 0  

m v - o  
c m m -
- i o 7 0  
0 0 0 0  
I 
I 

o o - N  
x r m e , m  
o w q w
0 . 1 0 0  

I 

N N - m
i n m e , -
o c c w  
3 - 3 3  
I 

I 

~  o  m 
c 
~  m 
- m m ?  
0 0 3 N  
I 
I 

m 
m a c e , =  
~  w 
o 
0 0 3 3  
I 
I 

q 

m m m c  
m m m c  
o c q q  
O - O a  

O N L Q L Q  
o m m m  
o m y ~ ?  o m , ? "  
; O O  

v v - a  
o

i m o c  
 m  m  m m m ~  ~  w 
o q 9 -
3 

a m - +  
o 
7 3 3  
q m c -

I 
I 
0 3 0  

0 

 ~

c a c o -

m m m m   m m m m  
o m m m  
0 7 1 "  
c q o ~ ?
I 
I 
0 0 3 0  

0

3

0

-

1

o m - m  
I C N O  
o w o q  
0 0 - m  

w m m m  
m i m i
- 1 0 . 0 9
O - - L r ;  

m o c o   C C - r i   w a m v  
c a c w  
o - x r -
- o ~ ? q   - w q y
- m 0 9  
0 0 0 m   0 - 0 0   3 3 3 3  

- m a -

m o m o  
x r o ~ m  
q o c m
O i O N  

- m w m l  

~ ( o - c   m o o =  

w w m a  
C ~ N N  m m m m  
q m y m   o c - 1  
O O N W  
I 

o - m e ,  

-

!

N - m m  
q m - 7
0 3 3 3  
I 
I 

m w m m  
m m m m  
c m q c  
o o a -

w m m m  

3 m w m  
3 0 . 1 3 ~ 9   m i
e q q w  
o 

v m o m
-
- o w ?  

o  ~  m o - a -

-

m m m o  
m m m m  
o m 0 . q  
0 0 0 0   0 3 3 0  

- m a =  
~ m c 
d . 9 " "  

- m x r ~ ~ x r ~ o a m  
a 
c;7-
0 3 - 0 ,  

- = m a
w

0 3 - N  

e 

m 

1 

I 

m m m c  
m  o m c c  
d m . - o  
3 0 - 0  
I 

  c a - m  
 -w
 i
~
i m m w   m a o m  
- , q a m .
- 0 . c . 7  
o o o o  
= - a m  
1

-- 1.  i-ii 

c a m m a  
~  m  w 
- ~ - e ,   a v m m  

m m m m  
m o c m  

I 

1 

3 m ~ m 
a m 
m ~
3 e : m w  
0 0 3 -
I 

I 

o w m m   m x r t n e ,
 m  m m - m  
~

2 2 - Z z - Z i  

 m  c

1

1 

1 

O O ~ L Q  a a v v
~ 3 0 m m
3 
9 
~ 
3 
c q y - ,
3 , 3 , m , m  
0 - o m  
3 - 3 w  
I 
I 

o o m m  
o o m m  
o c v q   3 , c o o .  
O h - 0  
o - o e  
N 

3
 0
= = m a  

 ~

1 

-

 m  a o c m  
o o m m  
0 3 , " C  
O d d -

0 

 
Table V 	
Goodness-of-fit diagnostics for the conditional one-day normalized returns, conditional on  10 technical  indicators, for a sample of  350 NYSEIAMEX 
stocks from 1962 to 1996 (10 stocks per size-quintile with a t  least 80% nonmissing prices are randomly chosen in each five-year subperiod, yielding 
50 stocks per subperiod over seven subperiods). For each pattern, the percentage of conditional returns that falls within each of the 10 unconditional-
return deciles is tabulated.  If conditioning on the pattern provides no information, the expected percentage falling in each decile is 10%.Asymptotic 
z-statistics for this null hypothesis  are reported in parentheses,  and the X"  goodness-of-fitness test statistic Q  is reported  in the last column with 
the p-value  in parentheses  below  the statistic. The  10 technical  indicators  are as follows: head-and-shoulders  (HS), inverted head-and-shoulders 
(IHS), broadening  top  (BTOP), broadening  bottom  (BBOT), triangle top  (TTOP), triangle bottom  (TBOT), rectangle top  (RTOP), rectangle bottom 
(RBOT), double  top (DTOP), and double  bottom  (DBOT). 

CL 

ul-4 
0

-- 

Decile: 

.-

Pattern 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

HS 

IHS 

BTOP 

BBOT 

TTOP 

TBOT 

RTOP 

RBOT 

DTOP 

DBOT 	

8.9 
(-1.49) 
8.6 
(-2.05) 
9.4 
(-0.57) 
11.5 
(1.28) 
7.8 
(-2.94) 
8.9 
(-1.35) 
8.4 
(-2.27) 
8.6 
(-2.01) 
8.2 
(-2.92) 
9.7 
(-0.48) 

10.4 
(0.56) 
9.7 
(-0.36) 
10.6 
(0.54) 
9.9 
(-0.10) 
10.4 
(0.42) 
10.6 
(0.72) 
9.9 
(-0.10) 
9.6 
(-0.56) 
10.9 
(1.36) 
9.9 
(-0.18) 

11.2 
(1.49) 
9.4 
(-0.88) 
10.6 
(0.54) 
13.0 
(2.42) 
10.9 
(1.03) 
10.9 
(0.99) 
9.2 
- 1 . 1 )  
7.8 
(-3.30) 
9.6 
(-0.64) 
10.0 
(-0.04) 

11.7 
(2.16) 
11.2 
(1.60) 
11.9 
(1.55) 
11.1 
(0.95) 
11.3 
(1.46) 
12.2 
(2.36) 
10.5 
(0.58) 
10.5 
(0.60) 
12.4 
(3.29) 
10.9 
(1.37) 

12.2 
(2.73) 
13.7 
(4.34) 
8.7 
(-1.25) 
7.8 
(-2.30) 
9.0 
(-1.30) 
9.2 
(-0.93) 
12.5 
(2.89) 
12.9 
(3.45) 
11.8 
(2.61) 
11.4 
(1.97) 

7.9 
(-3.05) 
7.7 
(-3.44) 
6.6 
(-3.66) 
9.2 
(-0.73) 
9.9 
(-0.13) 
8.7 
(-1.57) 
10.1 
(0.16) 
10.8 
(1.07) 
7.5 
(-4.39) 
8.5 
(-2.40) 

9.2 
(-1.04) 
9.1 
(-1.32) 
9.2 
(-0.71) 
8.3 
(-1.70) 
10.0 
(-0.04) 
9.3 
(-0.83) 
10.0 
(-0.02) 
11.6 
(1.98) 
8.2 
(-2.92) 
9.2 
(-1.33) 

10.4 
(0.48) 
11.1 
(1.38) 
13.7 
(2.87) 
9.0 
(-1.00) 
10.7 
(0.77) 
11.6 
(1.69) 
10.0 
(-0.02) 
9.3 
(-0.99) 
11.3 
(1.83) 
10.0 
(0.04) 

10.8 
(1.04) 
9.6 
(-0.62) 
9.2 
(-0.71) 
10.7 
(0.62) 
10.5 
(0.60) 
8.7 
(-1.57) 
11.4 
(1.70) 
10.3 
(0.44) 
10.3 
(0.46) 
10.7 
(0.96) 

7.1 
(-4.46) 
10.0 
(-0.03) 
10.1 
(0.06) 
9.6 
(-0.35) 
9.7 
(-0.41) 
9.8 
(-0.22) 
8.1 
(-2.69) 
8.7 
(-1.91) 
9.7 
(-0.41) 
9.8 
(-0.33) 

Q 

Y
(p-Value)  2-
3 
39.31 
s 
(0.000) 
2 
40.95 
(0.000)  % 
% 
23.40 
3 
(0.005) 
16.87 
2 
$ 
(0.051) 
c3m 
12.03 
(0.212) 
17.12 
(0.047) 
22.72 
(0.007) 
33.94 
(0.000) 
50.97 
(0.000) 
12.92 
(0.166) 

'l'able  VI 
Goodness-of-fit diagnostics for the conditional one-day normalized returns, conditional on 10 technical indicators, for a sample of 350 Nasdaq stocks 
from  1962 to  1996 (10 stocks per  size-quintile with  a t  least 80%  nonmissing  prices  are randomly  chosen in each five-year subperiod,  yielding  50 
stocks per  subperiod over seven subperiods). For each pattern, the percentage  of  conditional returns that falls within  each of  the 10 unconditional-
return deciles is tabulated.  If conditioning on the pattern provides no information, the expected percentage falling in each decile is 10%.Asymptotic 
z-statistics for this null hypothesis  are reported  in parentheses, and the ,y2  goodness-of-fitness test statistic Q is reported  in the last column with 
the p-value in parentheses  below the statistic. The  10 technical  indicators  are as follows: head-and-shoulders  (HS), inverted  head-and-shoulders 
(IHS), broadening top  (BTOP), broadening  bottom  (BBOT), triangle top  (TTOP), triangle bottom  (TBOT), rectangle  top  (RTOP), rectangle bottom 
(RBOT), double top  (DTOP), and double  bottom  (DBOT). 

Pattern 
-. 
HS 

IHS 

BTOP 

BBOT 

TTOP 

TBOT 

RTOP 

RBOT 

DTOP 

DBOT 

.-

1 

10.8 
(0.76) 
9.4 
(-0.56) 
11.6 
(1.01) 
11.4 
(1.00) 
10.7 
(0.67) 
9.9 
(-011) 
11.2 
(1.28) 
8.9 
(-1.35) 
11.0 
(1.12) 
10.9 
(0.98) 

. . -- . 

.-
2 

10.8 
(0.76) 
14.1 
(3.35) 
12.3 
(1.44) 
11.4 
(1.00) 
12.1 
(1.89) 
11.3 
(1.14) 
10.8 
(0.92) 
12.3 
(2.52) 
12.6 
(2.71) 
11.5 
(1.60) 

3 

4 

Decile: 

5 

6 

.. 

13.7 
(3.27) 
12.5 
(2.15) 
12.8 
(1.71) 
14.8 
(3.03) 
16.2 
(4.93) 
15.6 
(4.33) 
8.8 
(-1.40) 
8.9 
(-1.35) 
11.7 
(1.81) 
13.1 
(3.09) 

a 

8.6 
(-1.52) 
8.0 
( - 2 1 6 )  
7.7 
(-1.73) 
5.9 
(-3.91) 
6.2 
(-4.54) 
7.9 
(-2.24) 
8.3 
(-2.09) 
8.9 
(-1.45) 
9.0 
(-1.18) 
8.0 
(-2.47) 

8.5 
(-1.65) 
7.7 
(-2.45) 
8.2 
(-1.32) 
6.7 
(-2.98) 
7.9 
(-2.29) 
7.7 
(-2.39) 
10.2 
(0.25) 
11.6 
(1.81) 
9.2 
(-0.98) 
8.1 
(-2.35) 

6.0 
(-5.13) 
4.8 
(-7.01) 
6.8 
(-2.62) 
9.6 
(-0.27) 
8.7 
(-1.34) 
5.7 
(-5.20) 
7.1 
(-3.87) 
8.9 
(-1.35) 
5.5 
(-6.76) 
7.1 
(-3.75) 

. 

-.. 

7 

6.0 
(-5.13) 
6.4 
(-4.26) 
4.3 
(-5.64) 
5.7 
(--4.17) 
4.0 
(-8.93) 
5.3 
(-5.85) 
7.7 
(-2.95) 
7.0 
(-4.19) 
5.8 
(-6.26) 
7.6 
(-3.09) 

-..--

10 

9 
8 
--
.--- . 
13.5 
12.5 
(3.10) 
(2.30) 
12.5 
13.5 
(2.15) 
(2.90) 
12.1 
13.3 
(1.30) 
(1.97) 
9.8 
11.4 
(-0.12) 
(1.00) 
11.4 
12.5 
(1.29) 
(2.18) 
12.0 
14.6 
(1.76) 
(3.64) 
15.3 
9.3 
(4.92) 
(-0.75) 
13.6 
9.5 
(3.85) 
(-0.66) 
12.3 
11.6 
(2.39) 
(1.73) 
12.8 
11.5 
(2.85) 
(1.60) 
-- -... 

9.7 
(-0.32) 
11.3 
(1.14) 
10.9 
(0.57) 
13.2 
(2.12) 
10.2 
(0.23) 
10.0 
(0.01) 
11.3 
(1.37) 
10.3 
(0.36) 
11.3 
(1.47) 
9.3 
(-0.78) 

Q 
(p-Value) 

64.41 
(0.000) 
75.84 
(0.000) 
34.12 
(0.000) 
43.26 
(0.000) 
92.09 
(0.000) 

(0.000) 
57.08 
(0.000) 
45.79 
(0.000) 
71.29 
(0.000) 
51.23 
(0.000) 
-

F: 
2 

2 

8-
6' 
2 
% 

3 
$ .  
R 
2 

L+ 

5 

U7 
li 

85.26  % 

%' 

1752 

The Journal  of  Finance 

in the Nasdaq  sample, with p-values that are zero to three significant digits 
and  test  statistics  Q  that  range  from  34.12  to  92.09.  In  contrast, the  test 
statistics in Table V range from  12.03 to  50.97. 

One possible explanation for the difference between  the NYSE/AMEX and 
Nasdaq  samples is a  difference  in the power  of  the test because  of  different 
sample  sizes.  If  the  NYSE/AMEX  sample  contained  fewer  conditional  re- 
turns, that is, fewer patterns, the corresponding test statistics might be sub- 
ject  to greater sampling variation and lower power. However, this explanation 
can be ruled  out from the frequency  counts of  Tables  I and 11-the  number 
of  patterns in the NYSE/AMEX  sample is considerably larger than those  of 
the  Nasdaq  sample  for  all  10 patterns.  Tables  V  and  VI  seem  to  suggest 
important differences in the informativeness of technical indicators for NYSE/ 
AMEX  and Nasdaq  stocks. 

Table VII and VIII report the results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test (equa- 
tion  (19)) of  the equality of  the conditional and unconditional  return distri- 
butions  for  NYSE/AMEX  (Table  VII)  and  Nasdaq  (Table  VIII)  stocks, 
respectively,  from  1962  to  1996,  in  five-year  subperiods  and  in  market- 
capitalization  quintiles.  Recall  that  conditional  returns  are defined  as the 
one-day return starting three days following the conclusion of  a n  occurrence 
of  a pattern. The p-values are with respect to the asymptotic distribution  of 
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test statistic given in equation (20). Table VII shows 
that  for  NYSE/AMEX  stocks,  five  of  the  10 patterns-HS,  BBOT,  RTOP, 
RBOT, and DTOP-yield 
statistically significant test statistics, withp-values 
ranging from 0.000 for RBOT to 0.021 for DTOP patterns. However,  for the 
other five patterns, thep-values range from 0.104 for IHS to 0.393 for TTOP, 
which  implies  a n  inability  to  distinguish  between  the  conditional  and  un- 
conditional distributions  of  normalized  returns. 

When we  also condition  on  declining volume  trend, the  statistical signif- 
icance  declines  for  most  patterns, but  the  statistical  significance  of  TBOT 
patterns increases. In contrast, conditioning on increasing volume trend yields 
a n  increase in the statistical significance  of  BTOP patterns. This difference 
may  suggest  a n  important role  for  volume  trend  in TBOT  and  BTOP pat- 
terns.  The  difference  between  the  increasing  and  decreasing volume-trend 
conditional distributions  is statistically  insignificant  for  almost all the pat- 
terns  (the sole  exception  is the TBOT pattern). This drop in  statistical sig- 
nificance  may  be  due  to  a  lack  of  power  of  the  Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test 
given the relatively small sample sizes of these conditional returns (see Table I 
for  frequency  counts). 

Table VIII reports corresponding results for the Nasdaq sample, and as in 
Table VI,  in contrast to  the NYSE/AMEX results, here  all the patterns  are 
statistically  significant  a t  the 5 percent level. This is especially significant 
because  the the Nasdaq  sample exhibits far fewer patterns than the NYSE/ 
AMEX sample (see Tables I and 11), and hence the Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test 
is likely  to have  lower power  in this  case. 

As  with  the  NYSE/AMEX  sample, volume  trend  seems  to  provide  little 
incremental  information for the Nasdaq  sample except in one case: increas- 
ing volume  and BTOP. And  except  for  the TTOP pattern, the  Kolmogorov- 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

1753 

Smirnov  test  still  cannot  distinguish  between  the  decreasing  and  in- 
creasing volume-trend conditional  distributions,  as the last  pair  of  rows  of 
Table VII17s first panel  indicates. 

IV. Monte Carlo Analysis 

Tables  IX  and  X  contain  bootstrap  percentiles  for  the  Kolmogorov- 
Smirnov test of  the equality of  conditional and unconditional  one-day return 
distributions for NYSE/AMEX and Nasdaq stocks, respectively, from 1962 to 
1996, for  five-year subperiods,  and for  market-capitalization  quintiles,  un- 
der the null hypothesis  of  equality.  For each of  the two  sets of  market data, 
two  sample sizes,  m,  and  m,,  have  been  chosen  to  span the  range  of  fre- 
quency counts of  patterns reported  in Tables I  and 11. For  each  sample size 
m,, we resample one-day normalized  returns  (with replacement) to  obtain a 
bootstrap sample of  m, observations, compute the Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test 
statistic (against the entire  sample of  one-day normalized  returns), and re- 
peat this procedure  1,000 times. The percentiles  of  the asymptotic distribu- 
tion  are also reported  for  comparison in the cblumn labeled  "A". 

Tables  IX  and X show  that for  a  broad  range  of  sample  sizes  and across 
size  quintiles,  subperiod,  and  exchanges,  the bootstrap  distribution  of  the 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov  statistic is well approximated by its asymptotic distri- 
bution, equation  (20). 

V.  Conclusion 

In this paper, we have proposed  a new approach to evaluating the efficacy 
of technical analysis. Based on smoothing techniques such as nonparametric 
kernel regression, our approach incorporates the essence of  technical  analy- 
sis: to identify regularities in the time  series of  prices by  extracting nonlin- 
ear patterns from  noisy  data. Although human judgment  is still superior to 
most  computational  algorithms  in  the  area  of  visual  pattern  recognition, 
recent  advances in  statistical learning theory have had  successful applica- 
tions  in fingerprint  identification, handwriting  analysis,  and  face  recogni- 
tion.  Technical analysis  may well  be  the next  frontier for  such methods. 

We  find that certain technical patterns, when applied to many stocks over 
many time periods,  do provide  incremental  information, especially for Nas- 
daq stocks. Although this does not necessarily  imply that technical  analysis 
can be used  to generate "excess" trading profits, it does raise the possibility 
that technical  analysis  can  add value  to  the investment process. 

Moreover, our methods suggest that technical analysis can be improved by 
using automated algorithms such as ours and that traditional patterns such 
as head-and-shoulders  and  rectangles,  although  sometimes  effective,  need 
not  be  optimal.  In particular, it may be  possible  to determine "optimal pat- 
terns" for detecting certain types  of  phenomena in financial time series, for 
example,  an optimal  shape for  detecting stochastic volatility  or  changes in 
regime.  Moreover,  patterns  that are optimal for  detecting statistical anom- 
alies need  not be optimal for trading profits, and vice versa.  Such consider- 

Table VII 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test  of  the equality  of  conditional  and unconditional  one-day  return  distributions  for  NYSEIAMEX  stocks  from  1962 to 
1996, in five-year subperiods,  and in size quintiles. Conditional returns are defined  as the daily return three days following the conclusion of  an 
occurrence  of  one of  10 technical  indicators: head-and-shoulders  (HS), inverted head-and-shoulders (IHS), broadening top  (BTOP), broadening 
bottom  (RROT), triangle  top  (TTOP), triangle bottom  (TBOT), rectangle top  IRTOP), rectangle bottom  (RBOT), double top  (DTOP), and double 
bottom  (DBOT). All  returns have  been  normalized  by  subtraction  of  their  means  and division  by  their  standard  deviations. p-values  are with 
respect  to  the asymptotic  distribution  of  the Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test  statistic. The  syinbols "T(\)"  and " ~ ( 7 ) "  indicate that  the conditional 
distribution  is  also  conditioned  on decreasing and increasing volume trend, respectively. 

t-L 
-2
Crc 
iP 

S t a t i s t ~ c  

HS 

11-1S 

RTOP 

HBOT 

TTOP 

TROT 

RTOP 

RBOT 

DTOP 

DROT 

Y 
p-value 
Y T ( L )  
p-value 
r  r ( j l !  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
y  :(\) 
p-Vdl~10 
y  7 i 7 )  
p-value 
y  Diff 
p-value 

Y 
p  value 
Y  7 ( \ J  
p-value 
7 7 i / J  
p-value 
y  [)Iff 
p  value 

All  Stocks,  1962 to  1996 
0.90 
0.393 
0.73 
0.657 
0.92 
0.368 
0.75 
0.628 

1.76 
0.004 
0.62 
0.839 
1.59 
0.013 
0.94 
0.342 

1.09 
0.185 
1.33 
0.059 
1.29 
0.073 
1.37 
0.046 

Smallest  Quintile,  1962 to  1.996 
1.43 
0.98 
0.033 
0.290 
1.46 
1.00 
0.029 
0.271 
0.88 
0.47 
0.423 
0.981 
0.98 
0.48 
0.291 
0.976 

1.20 
0.114 
0.69 
0.723 
1.03 
0.236 
0.68 
0.741 

2nd  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 
0.82 
0.505 
0.91 
0.378 
0.89 
0.407 
1.22 
0.102 

0.92 
0.365 
0.42 
0.994 
0.83 
0.497 
0.71 
0.687 

0.84 
0.485 
0.90 
0.394 
0.98 
0.289 
0.92 
0.361 

r 
p-value 
r T ! L )  
p-value 
r T ( P )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  T ( L )  
p-value 
Y  T ( P )  
p-value 
y  1)iff. 
p-value 

r 
p-value 
r T ( L )  
p-value 
r ~ ( 7 )
p-value 
y  Uiff. 
p -value 

Y 

p-value 
r T ( L )  
p-value 
r ~ ( 7 )
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

3rd Quintile,  1962 to  1996 
0.57 
0.903 
0.61 
0.854 
0.63 
0.826 
0.50 
0.964 

1.28 
0.074 
0.76 
0.613 
1.14 
0.147 
0.48 
0.974 

1.03 
0.243 
0.82 
0.520 
0.80 
0.544 
0.89 
0.413 

4th  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 
0.61 
0.855 
0.78 
0.585 
1.16 
0.137 
1.31 
0.065 

0.84 
0.479 
0.96 
0.311 
0.96 
0.316 
1.16 
0.138 

0.84 
0.480 
0.84 
0.487 
0.69 
0.731 
0.78 
0.571 

Largest Quintile,  1962 to  1996 
0.50 
0.964 
0.64 
0.806 
0.69 
0.729 
0.76 
0.607 


0.48 
0.977 
0.78 
0.580 
0.61 
0.854 
0.64 
0.800 

0.80 
0.544 
1.17 
0.127 
0.81 
0.532 
1.21 
0.110 

All  Stocks,  1962 to  1966 

0.75 
0.634 
0.63 
0.826 
0.58 
0.894 
0.60 
0.863 

0.72 
0.671 
0.80 
0.539 
0.84 
0.475 
0.76 
0.615 

1.32 
0.062 
1.80 
0.003 
1.40 
0.040 
1.90 
0.001 

continued  r 
4ul 

CT( 

 
 
Y 
p-value 
Y  T ( L )  
p-value 
Y  ~ ( 7 ' )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y T(\) 

p-value 
Y ~ ( 7 )   

p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  T ( L )  
p-value 
Y  ~ ( 7 ' )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

All  Stocks,  1982 to  1986 
1.47 
0.027 
1.53 
0.018 
0.83 
0.499 
0.74 
0.643 

1.04 
0.232 
1.21 
0.106 
1.23 
0.097 
1.21 
0.107 

1.46 
0.029 
1.30 
0.070 
0.62 
0.831 
0.81 
0.532 

All  Stocks,  1987 to  1991 
0.75 
0.627 
1.03 
0.235 
0.74 
0.639 
0.67 
0.753 

0.67 
0.756 
0.72 
0.673 
1.37 
0.046 
1.06 
0.215 

0.86 
0.456 
0.81 
0.522 
1.10 
0.181 
0.93 
0.357 

All  Stocks,  1992 to  1996 
1.27 
0.078 
1.11 
0.174 
1.02 
0.246 
0.43 
0.993 

1.89 
0.002 
0.89 
0.404 
1.42 
0.036 
0.49 
0.971 

0.94 
0.343 
1.03 
0.242 
0.58 
0.895 
0.81 
0.528 

Table VIII 
Kolmogorov--Smirnov test of  the equality of  conditional and unconditional  one-day return distributions  for Nasdaq stocks from  1962 to  1996, in 
five-year subperiods,  and in size quintiles. Conditional returns are defined as the daily return three days following the conclusion  of  a n  occur- 
rence of  one of  10 technical  indicators: head-and-shoulders (HS), inverted head-and-shoulders (IHS), broadening top (BTOP), broadening bottom 
(BBOT), triangle  top  (TTOP), triangle bottom  (TBOT), rectangle top  (RTOP), rectangle bottom  (RBOT), double  top  (DTOP), and double  bottom 
(DBOT). All returns have been normalized  by  subtraction of  their means  and division  by their standard deviations. p-values are with respect to 
the asymptotic distribution  of  the Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test statistic. The symbols "r(\,)"  and "~(7)"indicate that the conditional  distribution 
is  also  conditioned  on decreasing and increasing volume trend, respectively. 

P 
-4
01 
03 

Statistic 

HS 

IHS 

BTOP 

BBOT 

TTOP 

TROT 

RTOP 

RROT 

DTOP 

DBOT 

Y 
p-value 
Y  7 ( \ )  
p-value 
Y  ~ ( 7 )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  7 ( \ )  
p-value 
Y  '(7) 
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  7 ( \ )  
p-value 
Y  ~ ( 7 )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

All  Stocks, 1962 to  1996 
2.81 
0.000 
1.97 
0.001 
1.89 
0.002 
1.73 
0.005 

1.84 
0.002 
0.99 
0.281 
1.59 
0.013 
0.80 
0.542 

2.34 
0.000 
1.95 
0.001 
1.18 
0.126 
0.74 
0.637 

Smallest Quintile, 1962 to  1996 
1.22 
0.101 
1.25 
0.089 
1.34 
0.055 
1.39 
0.042 

1.68 
0.007 
1.14 
0.150 
2.00 
0.001 
1.44 
0.031 

1.55 
0.016 
1.62 
0.010 
0.79 
0.553 
0.78 
0.574 

2nd  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 
1.24 
0.095 
1.23 
0.097 
1.38 
0.044 
1.02 
0.248 

1.44 
0.031 
0.92 
0.371 
0.97 
0.309 
0.69 
0.733 

1.08 
0.192 
0.79 
0.557 
1.29 
0.073 
1.05 
0.224 

Y 
p-value 
Y  T ( L )  
p-value 
Y  T ( P )  
p-value 
y  DiE. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  T ( L )  
p-value 
Y  d?) 
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 

p-value 
Y  T ( L )  
p-value 
Y  ~ ( 2 ' )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  T ( L )  
p-value 
Y  T ( P )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

3rd Quintile,  1962 to  1996 
1.41 
0.038 
1.06 
0.213 
0.75 
0.633 
0.61 
0.844 

1.71 
0.006 
1.23 
0.097 
1.37 
0.047 
0.46 
0.984 

1.52 
0.020 
1.02 
0.245 
1.01 
0.262 
0.89 
0.404 

4th Quirrtile,  1962 to  1996 
1.30 
0.067 
0.92 
0.367 
2.25 
0.000 
1.86 
0.002 

0.98 
0.298 
1.05 
0.217 
0.53 
0.938 
0.97 
0.301 

1.25 
0.087 
1.06 
0.215 
0.71 
0.696 
0.62 
0.843 

Largest  Quintile, 1962 to  1996 
0.92 
0.360 
0.77 
0.587 
0.88 
0.415 
0.76 
0.617 

0.66 
0.778 
0.47 
0.981 
0.93 
0.358 
0.84 
0.476 

0.68 
0.742 
0.76 
0.612 
1.25 
0.089 
1.11 
0.169 

All  Stocks, 1962 to  1966 
0.71 
0.697 
0.51 
0.956 
1.35 
0.052 
1.29 
0.071 

0.82 
0.508 
1.05 
0.224 
0.73 
0.663 
0.69 
0.735 

0.70 
0.718 
1.13 
0.155 
0.49 
0.972 
0.58 
0.892 

Statistic 

Y 
p-value 
Y  7 ( \ )  
p-value 
Y  7 ( / 1 )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  r ( \ )  
p-value 
Y  r(/1) 
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  7 ( \ )  
p-value 
Y  ~ ( 2 ' )  
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Table VIII-Continu,ecl 

IHS 

BTOP 
-

BBOT 

TTOP 

TBOT 

RTOP 

RBOT 

DTOP 

1.00 
0.273 
0.70 
0.714 
1.12 
0.165 
0.66 
0.770 

1.84 
0.002 
99.00 

0.000 

-99.00 

0.000 
- 99.00 

0.000 

1.03 
0.236 
9 9 . 0 0  
0.000 
0.80 
0.542 
9 9 . 0 0  
0.000 

All  Stocks,  1967 to  1971 

0.74 
0.637 
0.87 
0.438 
0.64 
0.810 
0.78 
0.585 

1.27 
0.079 
1.24 
0.092 
0.79 
0.566 
1.07 
0.203 

All  Stocks,  1972 to  1976 

1.13 
0.156 
0.91 
0.376 

-99.00 

0.000 

--- 

99.00 
0.000 

1.45 
0.029 
1.39 
0.042 
9 9 . 0 0  
0.000 
9 9 . 0 0  
0.000 

All  Stocks,  1977 to  1981 

1.02 
0.249 
-99.00 
0.000 
9 9 . 0 0  
0.000 

- 99.00 
0.000 

1.55 
0.016 
0.96 
0.317 
1.46 
0.028 
0.35 
1.000 

0.74 
0.642 
0.83 
0.490 
0.53 
0.941 
0.40 
0.997 

0.96 
0.314 
0.98 
0.292 
0.76 
0.611 
0.55 
0.925 

0.62 
0.842 
0.79 
0.554 
0.82 
0.514 
0.37 
0.999 

y
$ 
3
5 
3

R 

h 

5''3 
12
2 


.-

DBOT 
-

1.21 
0.107 
1.45 
0.031 
0.69 
0.723 
0.76 
0.602 

1.76 
0.004 
0.94 
0.344 
0.65 
0.798 
0.37 
0.999 

1.28 
0.077 
0.68 
0.748 
0.94 
0.336 
0.53 
0.944 

Y 
p-value 
Y  T ( L )  
p-value 
Y  ~(7') 
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  T(\) 
p-value 
Y  d ? )  
p-value 
y Diff. 
p-value 

Y 
p-value 
Y  T(\) 
p-value 
Y  ~(7') 
p-value 
y  Diff. 
p-value 

All  Stocks, 1982 t o  1986 
1.46 
0.028 
0.95 
0.330 
1.17 
0.129 
0.85 
0.462 

0.73 
0.654 
0.74 
0.641 
0.42 
0.995 
0.42 
0.994 

1.69 
0.006 
1.47 
0.027 
1.04 
0.231 
0.43 
0.993 

All  Stocks, 1987 t o  1991 
1.28 
0.074 
1.68 
0.007 
0.65 
0.787 
1.22 
0.102 

0.88 
0.421 
0.78 
0.580 
1.32 
0.060 
1.28 
0.075 

1.41 
0.039 
0.92 
0.369 
1.27 
0.078 
0.92 
0.360 

All  Stocks, 1992 to  1996 
0.97 
0.299 
0.81 
0.532 
1.10 
0.180 
1.15 
0.139 

0.90 
0.394 
0.78 
0.578 
1.00 
0.275 
0.62 
0.840 

0.91 
0.379 
0.93 
0.357 
1.04 
0.231 
1.14 
0.148 

The Journal  of  Finance 

Table M 
Bootstrap  percentiles  for  the  Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test  of  the  equality  of  conditional  and  un- 
conditional  one-day  return  distributions  for  NYSE/AMEX  and  Nasdaq  stocks  from  1962  to 
1996, and  for  size quintiles,  under  the null  hypothesis of  equality.  For  each of  the two  sets of 
market data, two  sample  sizes, lnl and 1 n 2 ,  have  been  chosen  to  span  the range  of  frequency 
counts of  patterns reported  in Table  I. For each sample  size m , , we  resample  one-day normal- 
ized  returns  (with replacement) to  obtain  a bootstrap  sample of  m, observations, compute  the 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test  statistic  (against the entire sample  of  one-day normalized  returns), 
and repeat this  procedure  1,000 times. The  percentiles of  the asymptotic distribution  are also 
reported  for  comparison. 

Percent~le 

r r ~ ,  

A,,,,,, 

117, 

1,,,>,, 

1 

m I 

A,,, , ,, 

rr1.2 

A,,, >  ,, 

1 

NYSE/AMEX  Sample 

-

Nasdaq  Sample 

All  Stocks, 1962 to  1996 


0.435 
0.535 
0.590 
0.836 
1.237 
1.395 
1.611 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

1320 

1320 

1320 

1320 

1320 

1320 

1320 


725 
725 
725 
725 
725 
725 
725 

Smallest Quintile,  1962 to  1996 


78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 

146 
146 
146 
146 
146 
146 
146 

145 
145 
145 
145 
145 
145 
145 

0.406 
0.502 
0.559 
0.814 
1.204 
1.330 
1.590 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

218 

218 

218 

218 

218 

218 

218 

2nd  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

305 

305 

305 

305 

305 

305 

305 


0.428 
0.505 
0.553 
0.823 
1.210 
1.343 
1.626 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

3rd Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

279 

279 

279 

279 

279 

279 

279 

4th  Quintile,  1962 to  1996 


0.458 
0.508 
0.557 
0.835 
1.251 
1.397 
1.661 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

173 
173 
173 
173 
173 
173 
173 

167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

0.418 
0.516 
0.559 
0.815 
1.183 
1.313 
1.592 

303 

303 

303 

303 

303 

303 

303 

Largest Quintile,  1962 to  1996 

308 

308 

308 

308 

308 

308 

308 


0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

0.425 
0.500 
0.554 
0.817 
1.202 
1.308 
1.615 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

Table X 
Bootstrap  percentiles  for  the  Koln~ogorov-Smirnov test  of  the  equality  of  conditional  and  un- 
conditional  one-day  return  distributions  for  NYSEIAMEX  and  Nasdaq  stocks  from  1962  to 
1996, for five-year subperiods, under the null hypothesis of equality. For each of  the two sets of 
market  data, two  sample  sizes,  m1 and  in,,  have  been  chosen  to  span the range  of  frequency 
counts  of  patterns reported  in  Table  I. For  each sample size i n , ,  we  resample  one-day normal- 
ized  returns  (with replacement) to  obtain  a bootstrap  sample of  m, observations, conlpute the 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test statistic  (against the entire sample of  one-day normalized  returns), 
and repeat  this  procedure  1,000 times.  The  percentiles  of  the asymptotic distribution  are also 
reported  for  conlparison. 

Percentile 

A,?,,,, 

n22 

A,,,,,, 

A 

7711 

A , , , , , ,  

7122 

A,,,,,, 

NYSE/AMEX  Sample 

Nasdaq  Sample 

0.431 
0.516 
0.576 
0.827 
1.233 
1.359 
1.635 

0.432 
0.522 
0.588 
0.841 
1.194 
1.315 
1.703 

0.439 
0.518 
0.588 
0.854 
1.249 
1.406 
1.685 

0.426 
0.519 
0.573 
0.841 
1.262 
1.383 
1.598 

0.462 
0.542 
0.585 
0.844 
1.266 
1.397 
1.727 

0.443 
0 513 
0.565 
0.837 
1.200 
1.336 
1.626 

0.438 
0.522 
0.567 
0.824 
1.220 
1 3 2 1  
1.680 

85 
85 
85 
85 
85 
85 
85 

112 
112 
112 
112 
112 
112 
112 

82 
82 
82 
82 
82 
82 
82 

110 
110 
110 
110 
110 
110 
110 

106 
106 
106 
106 
106 
106 
106 

98 
98 
98 
98 
98 
98 
98 

102 
102 
102 
102 
102 
102 
102 

All  Stocks, 1962 to  1966 
0.427 
0.509 
0.559 
0.813 
1.221 
1.363 
1.711 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

342 
342 
342 
342 
342 
342 
342 

All  Stocks,  1967 to  1971 
0.423 
0.508 
0.562 
0.819 
1 2 5 3  
1.385 
1.563 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

227 
227 
227 
227 
227 
227 
227 

All  Stocks, 1972 to  1976 
0.440 
0.503 
0.554 
0.798 
1.208 
1.364 
1.635 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

All  Stocks.  1977 to  1981 
0.435 
0.504 
0 555 
0.793 
1.184 
1.342 
1 6 4 5  

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

58 
58 
58 
58 
58 
58 
58 

96 
96 
96 
96 
96 
96 
96 

All  Stocks.  1982 to  1986 
0.437 
0.506 
0.559 
0.819 
1.220 
1 3 6 9  
1.615 

0 441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 

All  Stocks,  1987 to  1991 
0.449 
0.522 
0 566 
0.813 
1.217 
1 3 4 8  
1.563 

0.441 
0.520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

312 
312 
312 
312 
312 
312 
312 

All  Stock?, 1992 to  1996 
0.432 
0.506 
0.558 
0 818 
1.213 
1 3 1 0  
1 6 1 6  

0.441 
0 520 
0.571 
0.828 
1.224 
1.358 
1.628 

361 
361 
361 
361 
361 
361 
361 

0.460 
0.539 
0.589 
0.849 
1.242 
1.384 
1.582 

0.435 
0.512 
0.571 
0 811 
1.179 
1.346 
1.625 

0.433 
0.495 
0.542 
0.793 
1.168 
1.272 
1.618 

0.430 
0.504 
0.570 
0.821 
1.197 
1.352 
1.540 

0.448 
0.514 
0 579 
0.825 
1.253 
1.366 
1 6 9 2  

0.455 
0.542 
0.610 
0.878 
1.319 
1.457 
1.701 

0.447 
0.518 
0.559 
0.817 
1.226 
1.353 
1.617 

72 
72 
72 
72 
72 
72 
72 

65 
65 
65 
65 
65 
65 
65 

25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 

36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 

44 
44 
44 
44 
44 
44 
44 

50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 

87 
87 
87 
87 
87 
87 
87 

0.417 

0.501 

0.565 

0.802 

1.192 

1.339 

1.684 


0.424 

0.498 

0.546 

0.812 

1.219 

1.357 

1.669 


0.405 

0.479 

0.526 

0.783 

1.203 

1.345 

1.616 


0.417 

0.485 

0.542 

0.810 

1.201 

1.371 

1.545 


0.417 

0.499 

0.555 

0.802 

1.197 

1 3 3 7   

1.631 


0.432 

0.517 

0.563 

0.814 

1.216 

1.323 

1.648 


0.428 

0.492 

0 550 

0 799 

1.216 

1.341 

1.572 


The Journal  of  Finance 

ations may  lead  to  an entirely new  branch  of  technical  analysis, one based 
on selecting pattern-recognition algorithms to optimize specific objective func- 
tions. We  hope  to  explore these issues more  fully in future research. 

REFERENCES 

Allen, Franklin, and  Risto  Karjalainen,  1999, Using genetic  algorithms  to find technical  trad- 

ing rules, Journal  of  Financial  Economics  51, 245-271. 

Beymer,  David,  and  Tomaso  Poggio,  1996, Inlage  representation  for  visual  learning, Science 

272,  1905-1909. 

Blun~e, Lawrence,  David  Easley,  and Maureen  O'Hara,  1994, Market  statistics  and technical 

analysis: The role  of  volume, Journal  of  Finance  49,  153-181. 

Brock, William, Joseph Lakonishok, and Blake  LeBaron,  1992, Simple technical trading  rules 

and the  stochastic properties  of  stock returns, Journal  of  Finance  47,  1731-1764. 

Brown, David, and Robert  Jennings,  1989, On  technical  analysis, Review  of  Firzarzcial  Studies 

2, 527-551. 

Campbell, John, Andrew  W.  Lo, and A.  Craig MacKinlay,  1997, T h e  Econometrics  of  Financial 

Markets  (Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.). 

Chan,  Louis,  Narasimhan  Jegadeesh,  and  Joseph  Lakonishok,  1996,  Monlentum  strategies, 

Journal  of  Finance  51,  1681-1713. 

Chang, Kevin, and Carol Osler, 1994, Evaluating chart-based technical analysis: The head-and- 
shoulders  pattern  in  foreign  exchange  markets, Working  paper, Federal Reserve  Bank  of 
New York. 

Csaki, E.,  1984, Empirical distribution  function, in P. Krishnaiah and P.  Sen, eds.: Handbook  of 

Statistics, Vol. 4  (Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam,  the Netherlands). 
DeGroot,  Morris,  1986, Probability  and  Statistics  (Addison Wesley, Reading,  Mass.). 
Edwards,  Robert,  and  John  Magee,  1966, Technical  Analysis  of  Stock  Trends,  5th  ed.  (John 

Magee, Boston, Mass.). 

Grundy, Bruce,  and S. Martin, 1998, Understanding the nature  of  the risks  and the source  of 
the  rewards  to  momentum  investing,  Working  paper,  Wharton  School,  University  of 
Pennsylvania. 

Hardle, Wolfgang, 1990, Applied Nonparametric  Regression (Cambridge University Press, Cam- 

bridge,  U.K.). 

Hollander,  Myles,  and Douglas Wolfe, 1973, Nonparametric  Statistical  Methods  (John Wiley  & 

Sons, New York). 

Jegadeesh,  Narasimhan,  and  Sheridan  Titman,  1993, Returns  to  buying  winners  and  selling 

losers:  Inlplications  for  stock market  efficiency, Journal  of Finance  48,  65-91. 

Lo, Andrew W., and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1988, Stock market prices do not follow random walks: 

Evidence  from  a  simple  specification  test, Review  of Finarzcial  Studies  1, 41-66. 

Lo, Andrew W., and A.  Craig MacKinlay,  1997, Maximizing predictability in the stock and bond 

markets, Macroeconomic  Dynamics  1, 102-134. 

Lo, Andrew  W., and A.  Craig MacKinlay,  1999, A  Non-Random Walk d o w n  Wall Street  (Prince-

ton  University  Press, Princeton, N.J.). 

Malkiel, Burton,  1996, A  R a n d o m  Walk d o w n  Wall Street: Includiizg  a Life-Cycle Guide to Per- 

sonal  Investing  (W. W.  Norton, New York). 

Neely, Christopher, Peter Weller, and Robert  Dittmar,  1997, Is technical analysis in the foreign 
exchange  market  profitable? A genetic  programming  approach, Journal  of  Firzancial  and 
Quantitative Analysis  32, 405-426. 

Neely, Christopher, and Peter Weller,  1998, Technical  trading rules in the European  monetary 

system, Working  paper, Federal Bank of  St. Louis. 

Neftci,  Salih,  1991, Naive  trading  rules  in  financial markets  and Wiener-Kolmogorov  predic- 

tion  theory: A study of  technical  analysis, Journal  of Business  64, 549-571. 

Neftci, Salih, and Andrew  Policano,  1984, Can  chartists  outperform the market?  Market  effi- 

ciency  tests for  "technical  analyst ," Journal  of  Future  Markets 4, 465-478. 

Foundations of  Technical Analysis 

1765 

Osler, Carol, and Kevin  Chang,  1995, Head  and shoulders: Not just  a  flaky pattern, Staff Re- 

port  No.  4 ,  Federal  Reserve  Bank of  New  York. 

Poggio, Tomaso, and David Beymer, 1996, Regularization networks for visual learning, in Shree 
Nayar  and Tomaso  Poggio,  eds.: Early  Visual Learning  (Oxford University  Press, Oxford, 
U.K.). 

Press, William,  Brian Flannery, Saul Teukolsky, and William  Vetterling,  1986, Numerical Kec- 

ipes: The A r t   of  Scientific  Computing  (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.). 

Pruitt,  Stephen,  and  Robert  White,  1988, The  CRISMA trading  system:  Who  says  technical 


analysis  can't  beat the market? Journal  of  Po~tfolio Management  14, 55-58. 

Riesenhuber,  ~Maximilian, and Tomaso Poggio,  1997, Common computational  strategies in ma- 
chine and biological vision, in Proccedings of  International  Symposium on System Life  (To-
kyo, Japan), 67-75. 

Rouwenhorst, Geert, 1998, International momentum strategies, eJou~nalof Finance  53, 267-284. 
Sirnonoff, Jeffrey,  1996, Smoothing Methods  i n  Statistics  (Springer-Verlag, New 'lTork). 
Smirnov, N.,  1939a, Sur les  ecarts  de  la  courbe  de  distribution  empirique,  Rec.  Math.  (Mat. 

Sborn.) 6 ,  3-26. 

Smirnov, N.,  1939b, On  the  estimation  of  the discrepancy  between  empirical curves  of  distri- 

bution  for two independent  samples, Bulletin. Math.  Univ. Moscow  2, 3-14. 

Tabell, Anthony,  and Edward  Tabell,  1964, The  case for technical  analysis, Financial  Analyst 

eJou~nal20, 67-76. 

Treynor, Jack, and Robert Ferguson, 1985, In defense of  technical analysis, Journal  of Finance 

40, 757-773. 

Discussion 

NARASIMHAN  JEGADEESHK 

Academics have long been  skeptical  about  the usefulness  of  technical  trad- 
ing strategies. The literature that evaluates the performance of  such trading 
strategies has found mixed results. This literature has generally focused on 
evaluating  simple  technical  trading  rules  such  as  filter  rules  and  moving 
average rules  that  are fairly  straightforward  to  define  and implement. Lo, 
Mamaysky, and Wang (hereafter LMW) move this literature forward by  eval- 
uating more  complicated trading strategies used  by  chartists that are hard 
to  define and implement  objectively. 

Broadly, the  primary  objectives  of  LMW  are  to  automate  the  process  of 
identifying  patterns  in  stock  prices  and  evaluate  the usefulness  of  trading 
strategies  based  on  various  patterns. They  start with  quantitative  defini- 
tions of  10 patterns that are commonly used by  chartists. They then smooth 
the  price  data using  kernel  regressions. They  identify  various  patterns  in 
the  smoothed  prices  based  on  their  definitions  of  these  patterns.  Their  al- 
gorithms allow them to recognize patterns objectively on the computer rather 

* University  of  Illinois  a t  Urbana-Champaign. 

